PART 663 - PRE-AWARD AND POST-DELIVERY AUDITS OF ROLLING STOCK PURCHASES
Authority:49 U.S.C. 1608(j); 23 U.S.C. 103(e)(f); Pub. L. 96-184, 93 Stat. 1320; Pub. L. 101-551, 104 Stat. 2733; sec. 3023(m), Pub. L. 109-59; 49 CFR 1.51.
Source:56 FR 48395, Sept. 24, 1991, unless otherwise noted.
Subpart A - General
 663.1   Purpose.
This part implements section 12(j) of the Federal Mass Transit Act of 1964, as amended, which was added by section 319 of the 1987 Surface Transportation and Uniform Relocation Assistance Act (Pub. L. 100-17). Section 12(j) requires the Federal Transit Administration, by delegation from the Secretary of Transportation, to issue regulations requiring pre-award and post-delivery audits when a recipient of Federal financial assistance purchases rolling stock with funds made available under the Federal Mass Transit Act, as amended.
 663.3   Scope.
This part applies to a recipient purchasing rolling stock to carry passengers in revenue service with funds made available under sections 3, 9, 18, and 16(b)(2) of the Federal Mass Transit Act, as amended; 23 U.S.C. 103(e)(4); and section 14 of the National Capital Transportation Act of 1969, as amended.
 663.5   Definitions.
As used in this part - 
(a) Pre-award means that period in the procurement process before the recipient enters into a formal contract with the supplier.
(b) Post-delivery means the time period in the procurement process from when the rolling stock is delivered to the recipient until title to the rolling stock is transferred to the recipient or the rolling stock is put into revenue service, whichever is first.
(c) Recipient means a recipient of Federal financial assistance from FTA.
(d) Revenue service means operation of rolling stock for transportation of fare-paying passengers as anticipated by the recipient.
(e) Rolling stock means buses, vans, cars, railcars, locomotives, trolley cars and buses, ferry boats, and vehicles used for guideways and incline planes.
(f) Audit means a review resulting in a report containing the necessary certifications of compliance with Buy America standards, purchaser's requirements specifications, and, where appropriate, a manufacturer's certification of compliance with or inapplicability of the Federal Motor Vehicle Safety Standards, required by section 319 of STURAA and this part.
(g) FTA means the Federal Transit Administration.
 663.7   Certification of compliance to FTA.
A recipient purchasing revenue service rolling stock with funds obligated by FTA on or after October 24, 1991, must certify to FTA that it will conduct or cause to be conducted pre-award and post-delivery audits as prescribed in this part. In addition, such a recipient must maintain on file the certifications required under subparts B, C, and D of this part.
 663.9   Audit limitations.
(a) An audit under this part is limited to verifying compliance with
(1) Applicable Buy America requirements [section 165 of the Surface Transportation Assistance Act of 1982, as amended,]; and
(2) Solicitation specification requirements of the recipient.
(b) An audit under this part includes, where appropriate, a copy of a manufacturer's self certification information that the vehicle complies with Federal Motor Vehicle Safety Standards or a certification that such standards are inapplicable.
(c) An audit conducted under this part is separate from the single annual audit requirement established by Office of Management and Budget Circular A-128, Audits of State and Local Governments, dated May 16, 1985.
 663.11   Audit financing.
A recipient purchasing revenue rolling stock with FTA funds may charge the cost of activities required by this part to the grant which FTA made for such purchase.
 663.13   Buy America requirements.
A Buy America certification under this part shall be issued in addition to any certification which may be required by part 661 of this title. Nothing in this part precludes FTA from conducting a Buy America investigation under part 661 of this title.
 663.15   Compliance.
A recipient subject to this part shall comply with all applicable requirements of this part. Such compliance is a condition of receiving Federal financial assistance from FTA. A recipient determined not to be in compliance with this part will be subject to the immediate suspension, withholding, or repayment of Federal financial assistance from FTA or other appropriate actions unless and until it comes into compliance with this part.
Subpart B - Pre-Award Audits
 663.21   Pre-award audit requirements.
A recipient purchasing revenue service rolling stock with FTA funds must ensure that a pre-award audit under this part is complete before the recipient enters into a formal contract for the purchase of such rolling stock.
 663.23   Description of pre-award audit.
A pre-award audit under this part includes - 
(a) A Buy America certification as described in  663.25 of this part;
(b) A purchaser's requirements certification as described in  663.27 of this part; and
(c) Where appropriate, a manufacturer's Federal Motor Vehicle Safety certification information as described in  663.41 or  663.43 of this part.
 663.25   Pre-award Buy America certification.
For purposes of this part, a pre-award Buy America certification is a certification that the recipient keeps on file that - 
(a) There is a letter from FTA which grants a waiver to the rolling stock to be purchased from the Buy America requirements under section 165(b)(1), (b)(2), or (b)(4) of the Surface Transportation Assistance Act of 1982, as amended; or
(b) The recipient is satisfied that the rolling stock to be purchased meets the requirements of section 165(a) or (b)(3) of the Surface Transportation Assistance Act of 1982, as amended, after having reviewed itself or through an audit prepared by someone other than the manufacturer or its agent documentation provided by the manufacturer which lists - 
(1) Component and subcomponent parts of the rolling stock to be purchased identified by manufacturer of the parts, their country of origin and costs; and
(2) The location of the final assembly point for the rolling stock, including a description of the activities that will take place at the final assembly point and the cost of final assembly.
 663.27   Pre-award purchaser's requirements certification.
For purposes of this part, a pre-award purchaser's requirements certification is a certification a recipient keeps on file that - 
(a) The rolling stock the recipient is contracting for is the same product described in the purchaser's solicitation specification; and
(b) The proposed manufacturer is a responsible manufacturer with the capability to produce a vehicle that meets the recipient's specification set forth in the recipient's solicitation.
Subpart C - Post-Delivery Audits
 663.31   Post-delivery audit requirements.
A recipient purchasing revenue service rolling stock with FTA funds must ensure that a post-delivery audit under this part is complete before title to the rolling stock is transferred to the recipient.
 663.33   Description of post-delivery audit.
A post-delivery audit under this part includes - 
(a) A post-delivery Buy America certification as described in  663.35 of this part;
(b) A post-delivery purchaser's requirements certification as described in  663.37 of this part; and
(c) When appropriate, a manufacturer's Federal Motor Vehicle Safety Standard self-certification information as described in  663.41 or  663.43 of this part.
 663.35   Post-delivery Buy America certification.
For purposes of this part, a post-delivery Buy America certification is a certification that the recipient keeps on file that - 
(a) There is a letter from FTA which grants a waiver to the rolling stock received from the Buy America requirements under sections 165 (b)(1), or (b)(4) of the Surface Transportation Assistance Act of 1982, as amended; or
(b) The recipient is satisfied that the rolling stock received meets the requirements of section 165 (a) or (b)(3) of the Surface Transportation Assistance Act of 1982, as amended, after having reviewed itself or by means of an audit prepared by someone other than the manufacturer or its agent documentation provided by the manufacturer which lists - 
(1) Components and subcomponent parts of the rolling stock identified by manufacturer of the parts, their country of origin and costs; and
(2) The actual location of the final assembly point for the rolling stock including a description of the activities which took place at the final assembly point and the cost of the final assembly.
 663.37   Post-delivery purchaser's requirements certification.
For purposes of this part, a post-delivery purchaser's requirements certification is a certification that the recipient keeps on file that - 
(a) Except for procurements covered under paragraph (c) in this section, a resident inspector (other than an agent or employee of the manufacturer) was at the manufacturing site throughout the period of manufacture of the rolling stock to be purchased and monitored and completed a report on the manufacture of such rolling stock. Such a report, at a minimum, shall - 
(1) Provide accurate records of all vehicle construction activities; and
(2) Address how the construction and operation of the vehicles fulfills the contract specifications.
(b) After reviewing the report required under paragraph (a) of this section, and visually inspecting and road testing the delivered vehicles, the vehicles meet the contract specifications.
(c) For procurements of:
(1) Ten or fewer buses; or
(2) Procurements of twenty vehicles or fewer serving rural (other than urbanized) areas, or urbanized areas of 200,000 people or fewer; or
(3) Any number of primary manufacturer standard production and unmodified vans, after visually inspecting and road testing the vehicles, the vehicles meet the contract specifications.
 663.39   Post-delivery audit review.
(a) If a recipient cannot complete a post-delivery audit because the recipient or its agent cannot certify Buy America compliance or that the rolling stock meets the purchaser's requirements specified in the contract, the rolling stock may be rejected and final acceptance by the recipient will not be required. The recipient may exercise any legal rights it has under the contract or at law.
(b) This provision does not preclude the recipient and manufacturer from agreeing to a conditional acceptance of rolling stock pending manufacturer's correction of deviations within a reasonable period of time.
Subpart D - Certification of Compliance With or Inapplicability of Federal Motor Vehicle Safety Standards
 663.41   Certification of compliance with Federal motor vehicle safety standards.
If a vehicle purchased under this part is subject to the Federal Motor Vehicle Safety Standards issued by the National Highway Traffic Safety Administration in part 571 of this title, a recipient shall keep on file its certification that it received, both at the pre-award and post-delivery stage, a copy of the manufacturer's self-certification information that the vehicle complies with relevant Federal Motor Vehicle Safety Standards.
 663.43   Certification that Federal motor vehicle standards do not apply.
(a) Except for rolling stock subject to paragraph (b) of this section, if a vehicle purchased under this part is not subject to the Federal Motor Vehicle Safety Standards issued by the National Highway Traffic Safety Administration in part 571 of this title, the recipient shall keep on file its certification that it received a statement to that effect from the manufacturer.
(b) This subpart shall not apply to rolling stock that is not a motor vehicle.
PART 604 - CHARTER SERVICE 
Authority:49 U.S.C. 5323(d): 3023(d), Pub. L. 109-59; 49 CFR 1.51.
Source:73 FR 2345, Jan. 14, 2008, unless otherwise noted.
Subpart A - General provisions
 604.1   Purpose.
(a) The purpose of this part is to implement 49 U.S.C. 5323(d), which protects private charter operators from unauthorized competition from recipients of Federal financial assistance under the Federal Transit Laws.
(b) This subpart specifies which entities shall comply with the charter service regulations; defines terms used in this part; explains procedures for an exemption from this part; and sets out the contents of a charter service agreement.
 604.2   Applicability.
(a) The requirements of this part shall apply to recipients of Federal financial assistance under the Federal Transit Laws, except as otherwise provided in paragraphs (b) through (g) of this section.
(b) The requirements of this part shall not apply to a recipient transporting its employees, other transit system employees, transit management officials, transit contractors and bidders, government officials and their contractors and official guests, to or from transit facilities or projects within its geographic service area or proposed geographic service area for the purpose of conducting oversight functions such as inspection, evaluation, or review.
(c) The requirements of this part shall not apply to private charter operators that receive, directly or indirectly, Federal financial assistance under section 3038 of the Transportation Equity Act for the 21st Century, as amended, or to the non-FTA funded activities of private charter operators that receive, directly or indirectly, FTA financial assistance under any of the following programs: 49 U.S.C. 5307, 49 U.S.C. 5309, 49 U.S.C. 5310, 49 U.S.C. 5311, 49 U.S.C. 5316, or 49 U.S.C. 5317.
(d) The requirements of this part shall not apply to a recipient transporting its employees, other transit system employees, transit management officials, transit contractors and bidders, government officials and their contractors and official guests, for emergency preparedness planning and operations.
(e) The requirements of this part shall not apply to a recipient that uses Federal financial assistance from FTA, for program purposes only, under 49 U.S.C. 5310, 49 U.S.C. 5311, 49 U.S.C. 5316, or 49 U.S.C. 5317.
(f) The requirements of this part shall not apply to a recipient, for actions directly responding to an emergency declared by the President, governor, or mayor or in an emergency requiring immediate action prior to a formal declaration. If the emergency lasts more than 45 days, the recipient shall follow the procedures set out in subpart D of 49 CFR 601.
(g) The requirements of this part shall not apply to a recipient in a non-urbanized area transporting its employees, other transit system employees, transit management officials, and transit contractors and bidders to or from transit training outside its geographic service area.
 604.3   Definitions.
All terms defined in 49 U.S.C. 5301 et seq. are used in their statutory meaning in this part. Other terms used in this part are defined as follows:
(a) Federal Transit Laws means 49 U.S.C. 5301 et seq., and includes 23 U.S.C. 103(e)(4), 142(a), and 142(c), when used to provide assistance to public transit agencies for purchasing buses and vans.
(b) Administrator means the Administrator of the Federal Transit Administration or his or her designee.
(c) Charter service means, but does not include demand response service to individuals:
(1) Transportation provided by a recipient at the request of a third party for the exclusive use of a bus or van for a negotiated price. The following features may be characteristic of charter service:
(i) A third party pays the transit provider a negotiated price for the group;
(ii) Any fares charged to individual members of the group are collected by a third party;
(iii) The service is not part of the transit provider's regularly scheduled service, or is offered for a limited period of time; or
(iv) A third party determines the origin and destination of the trip as well as scheduling; or
(2) Transportation provided by a recipient to the public for events or functions that occur on an irregular basis or for a limited duration and:
(i) A premium fare is charged that is greater than the usual or customary fixed route fare; or
(ii) The service is paid for in whole or in part by a third party.
(d) Charter service hours means total hours operated by buses or vans while in charter service including:
(1) Hours operated while carrying passengers for hire, plus
(2) Associated deadhead hours.
(e) Chief Counsel means the Chief Counsel of FTA and his or her designated employees.
(f) Days means calendar days. The last day of a time period is included in the computation of time unless the last day is a Saturday, Sunday, or legal holiday, in which case, the time period runs until the end of the next day that is not a Saturday, Sunday, or legal holiday.
(g) Demand response means any non-fixed route system of transporting individuals that requires advanced scheduling by the customer, including services provided by public entities, nonprofits, and private providers.
(h) Exclusive means service that a reasonable person would conclude is intended to exclude members of the public.
(i) FTA means the Federal Transit Administration.
(j) Geographic service area means the entire area in which a recipient is authorized to provide public transportation service under appropriate local, state, and Federal law.
(k) Government official means an individual elected or appointed at the local, state, or Federal level.
(l) Interested party means an individual, partnership, corporation, association, or other organization that has a financial interest that is affected by the actions of a recipient providing charter service under the Federal Transit Laws. This term includes states, counties, cities, and their subdivisions, and tribal nations.
(m) Pattern of violations means more than one finding of unauthorized charter service under this part by FTA beginning with the most recent finding of unauthorized charter service and looking back over a period not to exceed 72 months.
(n) Presiding Official means an official or agency representative who conducts a hearing at the request of the Chief Counsel and who has had no previous contact with the parties concerning the issue in the proceeding.
(o) Program purposes means transportation that serves the needs of either human service agencies or targeted populations (elderly, individuals with disabilities, and or low income individuals); this does not include exclusive service for other groups formed for purposes unrelated to the special needs of the targeted populations identified herein.
(p) Public transportation has the meaning set forth in 49 U.S.C. 5302(a)(10).
(q) Qualified human service organization means an organization that serves persons who qualify for human service or transportation-related programs or services due to disability, income, or advanced age. This term is used consistent with the President's Executive Order on Human Service Transportation Coordination (February 24, 2004).
(r) Recipient means an agency or entity that receives Federal financial assistance, either directly or indirectly, including subrecipients, under the Federal Transit Laws. This term does not include third-party contractors who use non-FTA funded vehicles.
(s) Registered charter provider means a private charter operator that wants to receive notice of charter service requests directed to recipients and has registered on FTA's charter registration Web site.
(t) Registration list means the current list of registered charter providers and qualified human service organizations maintained on FTA's charter registration Web site.
(u) Special transportation means demand response or paratransit service that is regular and continuous and is a type of public transportation.
(v) Violation means a finding by FTA of a failure to comply with one of the requirements of this Part.
 604.4   Charter service agreement.
(a) A recipient seeking Federal assistance under the Federal Transit Laws to acquire or operate any public transportation equipment or facilities shall enter into a Charter Service Agreement as set out in paragraph (b) of this section.
(b) A recipient shall enter into a Charter Service Agreement if it receives Federal funds for equipment or facilities under the Federal Transit Laws. The terms of the Charter Service Agreement are as follows: The recipient agrees that it, and each of its subrecipients, and third party contractors at any level who use FTA-funded vehicles, may provide charter service using equipment or facilities acquired with Federal assistance authorized under the Federal Transit Laws only in compliance with the regulations set out in 49 CFR 604, the terms and conditions of which are incorporated herein by reference.
(c) The Charter Service Agreement is contained in the Certifications and Assurances published annually by FTA for applicants for Federal financial assistance. Once a recipient receives Federal funds, the Certifications and Assurances become part of its Grant Agreement or Cooperative Agreement for Federal financial assistance.
Subpart B - Exceptions
 604.5   Purpose.
The purpose of this subpart is to identify the limited exceptions under which recipients may provide community-based charter services.
 604.6   Government officials on official government business.
(a) A recipient may provide charter service to government officials (Federal, State, and local) for official government business, which can include non-transit related purposes, if the recipient:
(1) Provides the service in its geographic service area;
(2) Does not generate revenue from the charter service, except as required by law; and
(3) After providing such service, records the following:
(i) The government organization's name, address, phone number, and e-mail address;
(ii) The date and time of service;
(iii) The number of passengers (specifically noting the number of government officials on the trip);
(iv) The origin, destination, and trip length (miles and hours);
(v) The fee collected, if any; and
(vi) The vehicle number for the vehicle used to provide the service.
(b) A recipient that provides charter service under this section shall be limited annually to 80 charter service hours for providing trips to government officials for official government business.
(c) A recipient may petition the Administrator for additional charter service hours only if the petition contains the following information:
(1) Date and description of the official government event and the number of charter service hours requested;
(2) Explanation of why registered charter providers in the geographic service area cannot perform the service (e.g., equipment, time constraints, or other extenuating circumstances); and
(3) Evidence that the recipient has sent the request for additional hours to registered charter providers in its geographic service area.
(d) FTA shall post the request for additional charter service hours under this exception in the Government Officials Exception docket, docket number FTA-2007-0020 at  Interested parties may review the contents of this docket and bring questions or concerns to the attention of the Ombudsman for Charter Services. The written decision of the Administrator regarding the request for additional charter service hours shall be posted in the Government Officials Exception docket and sent to the recipient.
 604.7   Qualified human service organizations.
(a) A recipient may provide charter service to a qualified human service organization (QHSO) for the purpose of serving persons:
(1) With mobility limitations related to advanced age;
(2) With disabilities; or
(3) With low income.
(b) If an organization serving persons described in paragraph (a) of this section receives funding, directly or indirectly, from the programs listed in Appendix A of this part, the QHSO shall not be required to register on the FTA charter registration Web site.
(c) If a QHSO serving persons described in paragraph (a) of this section does not receive funding from any of the programs listed in Appendix A of this part, the QHSO shall register on the FTA charter registration Web site in accordance with  604.15.
(d) A recipient providing charter service under this exception, whether or not the QHSO receives funding from Appendix A programs, and after providing such charter service, shall record:
(1) The QHSO's name, address, phone number, and e-mail address;
(2) The date and time of service;
(3) The number of passengers;
(4) The origin, destination, and trip length (miles and hours);
(5) The fee collected, if any; and
(6) The vehicle number for the vehicle used to provide the service.
 604.8   Leasing FTA funded equipment and drivers.
(a) A recipient may lease its FTA-funded equipment and drivers to registered charter providers for charter service only if the following conditions exist:
(1) The private charter operator is registered on the FTA charter registration Web site;
(2) The registered charter provider owns and operates buses or vans in a charter service business;
(3) The registered charter provider received a request for charter service that exceeds its available capacity either of the number of vehicles operated by the registered charter provider or the number of accessible vehicles operated by the registered charter provider; and
(4) The registered charter provider has exhausted all of the available vehicles of all registered charter providers in the recipient's geographic service area.
(b) A recipient leasing vehicles and drivers to a registered charter provider under this provision shall record:
(1) The registered charter provider's name, address, telephone number, and e-mail address;
(2) The number of vehicles leased, types of vehicles leased, and vehicle identification numbers; and
(3) The documentation presented by the registered charter provider in support of paragraphs (a)(1) through (4) of this section.
(c) In accordance with  604.26, if a registered charter provider seeking to lease vehicles has filed a complaint requesting that another registered charter provider be removed from the FTA charter registration Web site, then the registered charter provider seeking to lease vehicles is not required to exhaust the vehicles from that registered charter provider while the complaint is pending before leasing vehicles from a recipient.
 604.9   When no registered charter provider responds to notice from a recipient.
(a) A recipient may provide charter service, on its own initiative or at the request of a third party, if no registered charter provider responds to the notice issued in  604.14:
(1) Within 72 hours for charter service requested to be provided in less than 30 days; or
(2) Within 14 calendar days for charter service requested to be provided in 30 days or more.
(b) A recipient shall not provide charter service under this section if a registered charter provider indicates an interest in providing the charter service set out in the notice issued pursuant to  604.14 and the registered charter provider has informed the recipient of its interest in providing the service.
(c) After providing the service, a recipient shall record:
(1) The group's name, address, phone number, and e-mail address;
(2) The date and time of service;
(3) The number of passengers;
(4) The origin, destination, and trip length (miles and hours);
(5) The fee collected, if any; and
(6) The vehicle number for the vehicle used to provide the service.
 604.10   Agreement with registered charter providers.
(a) A recipient may provide charter service directly to a customer consistent with an agreement entered into with all registered charter providers in the recipient's geographic service area.
(b) If a new charter provider registers in the geographic service area subsequent to the initial agreement, the recipient may continue to provide charter service under the previous agreement with the other charter providers up to 90 days without an agreement with the newly registered charter provider.
(c) Any of the parties to an agreement may cancel the agreement at any time after providing the recipient a 90-day notice.
 604.11   Petitions to the Administrator.
(a) A recipient may petition the Administrator for an exception to the charter service regulations to provide charter service directly to a customer for:
(1) Events of regional or national significance;
(2) Hardship (only for non-urbanized areas under 50,000 in population or small urbanized areas under 200,000 in population); or
(3) Unique and time sensitive events (e.g., funerals of local, regional, or national significance) that are in the public's interest.
(b) The petition to the Administrator shall include the following information:
(1) The date and description of the event;
(2) The type of service requested and the type of equipment;
(3) The anticipated number of charter service hours needed for the event;
(4) The anticipated number of vehicles and duration of the event; and
(i) For an event of regional or national significance, the petition shall include a description of how registered charter providers were consulted, how registered charter providers will be utilized in providing the charter service, a certification that the recipient has exhausted all of the registered charter providers in its geographic service area, and submit the petition at least 90 days before the first day of the event described in paragraph (b)(1) of this section;
(ii) For a hardship request, a petition is only available if the registered charter provider has deadhead time that exceeds total trip time from initial pick-up to final drop-off, including wait time. The petition shall describe how the registered charter provider's minimum duration would create a hardship on the group requesting the charter service; or
(iii) For unique and time sensitive events, the petition shall describe why the event is unique or time sensitive and how providing the charter service would be in the public's interest.
(c) Upon receipt of a petition that meets the requirements set forth in paragraph (b) of this section, the Administrator shall review the materials and issue a written decision denying or granting the request in whole or in part. In making this decision, the Administrator may seek such additional information as the Administrator deems necessary. The Administrator's decision shall be filed in the Petitions to the Administrator docket, number FTA-2007-0022 at  and sent to the recipient.
(d) Any exception granted by the Administrator under this section shall be effective only for the event identified in paragraph (b)(1) of this section.
(e) A recipient shall send its petition to the Administrator by facsimile to (202) 366-3809 or by e-mail to ombudsman.charterservice@dot.gov.
(f) A recipient shall retain a copy of the Administrator's approval for a period of at least three years and shall include it in the recipient's quarterly report posted on the charter registration Web site.
 604.12   Reporting requirements for all exceptions.
(a) A recipient that provides charter service in accordance with one or more of the exceptions contained in this subpart shall maintain the required notice and records in an electronic format for a period of at least three years from the date of the service or lease. A recipient may maintain the required records in other formats in addition to the electronic format.
(b) In addition to the requirements identified in paragraph (a) of this section, the records required under this subpart shall include a clear statement identifying which exception the recipient relied upon when it provided the charter service.
(c) Beginning on July 30, 2008, a recipient providing charter service under these exceptions shall post the records required under this subpart on the FTA charter registration Web site 30 days after the end of each calendar quarter (i.e., January 30th, April 30th, July 30th, and October 30th). A single document or charter log may include all charter service trips provided during the quarter.
(d) A recipient may exclude specific origin and destination information for safety and security reasons. If a recipient excludes such information, the record of the service shall describe the reason why such information was excluded and provide generalized information instead of providing specific origin and destination information.
Subpart C - Procedures for Registration and Notification
 604.13   Registration of private charter operators.
(a) Private charter operators shall provide the following information at  to be considered a registered charter provider:
(1) Company name, address, phone number, e-mail address, and facsimile number;
(2) Federal and, if available, state motor carrier identifying number;
(3) The geographic service areas of public transit agencies, as identified by the transit agency's zip code, in which the private charter operator intends to provide charter service;
(4) The number of buses or vans the private charter operator owns;
(5) A certification that the private charter operator has valid insurance; and
(6) Whether willing to provide free or reduced rate charter services to registered qualified human service organizations.
(b) A private charter operator that provides valid information in this subpart is a registered charter provider for purposes of this part and shall have standing to file a complaint consistent with subpart F.
(c) A recipient, a registered charter provider, or their duly authorized representative, may challenge a registered charter provider's registration and request removal of the private charter operator from FTA's charter registration Web site by filing a complaint consistent with subpart F.
(d) FTA may refuse to post a private charter operator's information if the private charter operator fails to provide all of the required information as indicated on the FTA charter registration Web site.
(e) A registered charter provider shall provide current and accurate information on FTA's charter registration Web site, and shall update that information no less frequently than every two years.
 604.14   Recipient's notification to registered charter providers.
(a) Upon receiving a request for charter service, a recipient may:
(1) Decline to provide the service, with or without referring the requestor to FTA's charter registration Web site (
(2) Provide the service under an exception provided in subpart B of this part; or
(3) Provide notice to registered charter providers as provided in this section and provide the service pursuant to  604.9.
(b) If a recipient is interested in providing charter service under the exception contained in  604.9, then upon receipt of a request for charter service, the recipient shall provide e-mail notice to registered charter providers in the recipient's geographic service area in the following manner:
(1) E-mail notice of the request shall be sent by the close of business on the day the recipient receives the request unless the recipient received the request after 2 p.m., in which case the recipient shall send the notice by the close of business the next business day;
(2) E-mail notice sent to the list of registered charter providers shall include:
(i) Customer name, address, phone number, and e-mail address (if available);
(ii) Requested date of service;
(iii) Approximate number of passengers;
(iv) Whether the type of equipment requested is (are) bus(es) or van(s); and
(v) Trip itinerary and approximate duration; and
(3) If the recipient intends to provide service that meets the definition of charter service under  604.3(c)(2), the e-mail notice must include the fare the recipient intends to charge for the service.
(c) A recipient shall retain an electronic copy of the e-mail notice and the list of registered charter providers that were sent e-mail notice of the requested charter service for a period of at least three years from the date the e-mail notice was sent.
(d) If a recipient receives an undeliverable notice in response to its e-mail notice, the recipient shall send the notice via facsimile. The recipient shall maintain the record of the undeliverable e-mail notice and the facsimile sent confirmation for a period of three years.
Subpart D - Registration of Qualified Human Service Organizations and Duties for Recipients With Respect to Charter Registration Web site
 604.15   Registration of qualified human service organizations.
(a) Qualified human service organizations (QHSO) that seek free or reduced rate services from recipients, and do not receive funds from Federal programs listed in Appendix A, but serve individuals described in  604.7 (i.e., individuals with low income, advanced age, or with disabilities), shall register on FTA's charter registration Web site by submitting the following information:
(1) Name of organization, address, phone number, e-mail address, and facsimile number;
(2) The geographic service area of the recipient in which the qualified human service organization resides;
(3) Basic financial information regarding the qualified human service organization and whether the qualified human service organization is exempt from taxation under sections 501(c) (1), (3), (4), or (19) of the Internal Revenue Code, and whether it is a unit of Federal, State or local government;
(4) Whether the qualified human service organization receives funds directly or indirectly from a State or local program, and if so, which program(s); and
(5) A narrative statement describing the types of charter service trips the qualified human service organization may request from a recipient and how that service is consistent with the mission of the qualified human service organization.
(b) A qualified human service organization is eligible to receive charter services from a recipient if it:
(1) Registers on the FTA Web site in accordance with paragraph (a) of this section at least 60 days before the date of the requested charter service; and
(2) Verifies FTA's receipt of its registration by viewing its information on the FTA charter registration Web site (
(c) A registered charter provider may challenge a QHSO's status to receive charter services from a recipient by requesting removal of the QHSO from FTA's charter registration Web site by filing a complaint consistent with subpart F.
(d) A QHSO shall provide current and accurate information on FTA's charter registration Web site, and shall update that information no less frequently than every two years.
 604.16   Duties for recipients with respect to charter registration Web site.
Each recipient shall ensure that its affected employees and contractors have the necessary competency to effectively use the FTA charter registration Web site.
Subpart E - Advisory Opinions and Cease and Desist Orders
 604.17   Purpose.
The purpose of this subpart is to set out the requirements for requesting an advisory opinion from the Chief Counsel's Office. An advisory opinion may also request that the Chief Counsel issue a cease and desist order, which would be an order to refrain from doing an act which, if done, would be a violation of this part.
 604.18   Request for an advisory opinion.
(a) An interested party may request an advisory opinion from the Chief Counsel on a matter regarding specific factual events only.
(b) A request for an advisory opinion shall be submitted in the following form:
[Date] 
Chief Counsel, Federal Transit Administration, 1200 New Jersey Ave. SE., Room E55-302, Washington, DC 20590 
Re: Request for Advisory Opinion 
The undersigned submits this request for an advisory opinion from the FTA Chief Counsel with respect to [the general nature of the matter involved].
A. A full statement of all facts and legal points relevant to the request 
B. An affirmation that the undersigned swears, to the best of his/her knowledge and belief, this request includes all data, information, and views relevant to the matter, whether favorable or unfavorable to the position of the undersigned, which is the subject of the request.
C. The following certification: I hereby certify that I have this day served the foregoing [name of document] on the following interested party(ies) at the following addresses and e-mail or facsimile numbers (if also served by e-mail or facsimile) by [specify method of service]:
[list persons, addresses, and e-mail or facsimile numbers] 
 Dated this ____ day of __ , 20__.
 [Signature] 
 [Printed name] 
 [Title of person making request] 
 [Mailing address] 
 [Telephone number] 
 [e-mail address]
(c) The Chief Counsel may request additional information, as necessary, from the party submitting the request for an advisory opinion.
(d) A request for an advisory opinion may be denied if:
(1) The request contains incomplete information on which to base an informed advisory opinion;
(2) The Chief Counsel concludes that an advisory opinion cannot reasonably be given on the matter involved;
(3) The matter is adequately covered by a prior advisory opinion or a regulation;
(4) The Chief Counsel otherwise concludes that an advisory opinion would not be in the public interest.
 604.19   Processing of advisory opinions.
(a) A request for an advisory opinion shall be sent to the Chief Counsel at ombudsman.charterservice@dot.gov, and filed electronically in the Charter Service Advisory Opinion/Cease and Desist Order docket number FTA-2007-0023 at  or sent to the dockets office located at 1200 New Jersey Ave., SE., West Building Ground Floor, Room W12-140, Washington, DC 20590, for submission to that docket.
(b) The Chief Counsel shall make every effort to respond to a request for an advisory opinion within ten days of receipt of a request that complies with  604.18(b). The Chief Counsel shall send his or her decision to the interested party, the docket, and the recipient, if appropriate.
 604.20   Effect of an advisory opinion.
(a) An advisory opinion represents the formal position of FTA on a matter, and except as provided in  604.25 of this subpart, obligates the agency to follow it until it is amended or revoked.
(b) An advisory opinion may be used in administrative or court proceedings to illustrate acceptable and unacceptable procedures or standards, but not as a legal requirement and is limited to the factual circumstances described in the request for an advisory opinion. The Chief Counsel's advisory opinion shall not be binding upon a Presiding Official conducting a proceeding under subpart I of this part.
(c) A statement made or advice provided by an FTA employee constitutes an advisory opinion only if it is issued in writing under this section. A statement or advice given by an FTA employee orally, or given in writing, but not under this section, is an informal communication that represents the best judgment of that employee at the time but does not constitute an advisory opinion, does not necessarily represent the formal position of FTA, and does not bind or otherwise obligate or commit the agency to the views expressed.
 604.21   Special considerations for advisory opinions.
Based on new facts involving significant financial considerations, the Chief Counsel may take appropriate enforcement action contrary to an advisory opinion before amending or revoking the opinion. This action shall be taken only with the approval of the Administrator.
 604.22   Request for a cease and desist order.
(a) An interested party may also request a cease and desist order as part of its request for an advisory opinion. A request for a cease and desist order shall contain the following information in addition to the information required for an advisory opinion:
(1) A description of the need for the cease and desist order, a detailed description of the lost business opportunity the interested party is likely to suffer if the recipient performs the charter service in question, and how the public interest will be served by avoiding or ameliorating the lost business opportunity. A registered charter provider must distinguish its loss from that of other registered charter providers in the geographic service area.
(2) A detailed description of the efforts made to notify the recipient of the potential violation of the charter service regulations. Include names, titles, phone numbers or e-mail addresses of persons contacted, date and times contact was made, and the response received, if any.
(b) A request for a cease and desist order may be denied if:
(1) The request contains incomplete information on which to base an informed a cease and desist order;
(2) The Chief Counsel concludes that a cease and desist order cannot reasonably be given on the matter involved;
(3) The matter is adequately covered by a prior a cease and desist order; or
(4) The Chief Counsel otherwise concludes that a cease and desist order would not be in the public interest.
(c) A recipient who is the subject of a request for a cease and desist order shall have three business days to respond to the request. The response shall include a point-by-point rebuttal to the information included in the request for a cease and desist order.
(d) The time period for a response by the recipient begins once a registered charter provider files a request in the Advisory Opinion/Cease and Desist Order docket (FTA-2007-0023 at  or with the FTA Chief Counsel's Office, whichever date is sooner.
 604.23   Effect of a cease and desist order.
(a) Issuance of a cease and desist order against a recipient shall be considered as an aggravating factor in determining the remedy to impose against the recipient in future findings of noncompliance with this part, if the recipient provides the service described in the cease and desist order issued by the Chief Counsel.
(b) In determining whether to grant the request for a cease and desist order, the Chief Counsel shall consider the specific facts shown in the signed, sworn request for a cease and desist order, applicable statutes and regulations, and any other information that is relevant to the request.
 604.24   Decisions by the Chief Counsel regarding cease and desist orders.
(a) The Chief Counsel may grant a request for a cease and desist order if the interested party demonstrates, by a preponderance of the evidence, that the planned provision of charter service by a recipient would violate this part.
(b) In determining whether to grant the request for a cease and desist order, the Chief Counsel shall consider the specific facts shown in the signed, sworn request for a cease and desist order, applicable statutes, regulations, agreements, and any other information that is relevant to the request.
Subpart F - Complaints
 604.25   Purpose.
This subpart describes the requirements for filing a complaint challenging the registration of a private charter operator or qualified human service organization on the FTA charter registration Web site and filing a complaint regarding the provision of charter service by a recipient. Note: To save time and expense for all concerned, FTA expects all parties to attempt to resolve matters informally before beginning the official complaint process.
 604.26   Complaints and decisions regarding removal of private charter operators or qualified human service organizations from registration list.
(a) A recipient, a registered charter provider, or its duly authorized representative, may challenge the listing of a registered charter provider or qualified human service organization on FTA's charter registration Web site by filing a complaint that meets the following:
(1) States the name and address of each entity who is the subject of the complaint;
(2) Provides a concise but complete statement of the facts relied upon to substantiate the reason why the private charter operator or qualified human service organization should not be listed on the FTA charter registration Web site;
(3) Files electronically by submitting it to the Charter Service Removal Complaint docket number FTA-2007-0024 at 
(4) Serves by e-mail or facsimile if no e-mail address is available, or by overnight mail service with receipt confirmation, and attaches documents offered in support of the complaint upon all entities named in the complaint;
(5) Files within 90 days of discovering facts that merit removal of the registered charter provider or qualified human service organization from the FTA Charter Registration Web site; and
(6) Contains the following certification:
I hereby certify that I have this day served the foregoing [name of document] on the following persons at the following addresses and e-mail or facsimile numbers (if also served by e-mail or facsimile) by [specify method of service]:
[list persons, addresses, and e-mail or facsimile numbers] 
Dated this ____ day of ____, 20__.
 [signature], for [party].
(b) The registered charter provider or qualified human service organization shall have 15 days to answer the complaint and shall file such answer, and all supporting documentation, in the Charter Service Removal Complaint docket number FTA-2007-0024 at  and e-mail such answer to ombudsman.charterservice@dot.gov.
(c) A recipient, qualified human service organization, or a registered charter provider, or its duly authorized representative, shall not file a reply to the answer.
(d) FTA shall determine whether to remove the registered charter provider or qualified human service organization from the FTA charter registration Web site based on a preponderance of the evidence of one or more of the following:
(1) Bad faith;
(2) Fraud;
(3) Lapse of insurance;
(4) Lapse of other documentation; or
(5) The filing of more than one complaint, which on its face, does not state a claim that warrants an investigation or further action by FTA.
(e) FTA's determination whether or not to remove a registered charter provider or qualified human service organization from the registration list shall be sent to the parties within 30 days of the date of the response required in paragraph (b) of this section and shall state:
(1) Reasons for allowing the continued listing or removal of the registered charter provider or qualified human service organization from the registration list;
(2) If removal is ordered, the length of time (not to exceed three years) the private charter operator or qualified human service organization shall be barred from the registration list; and
(3) The date by which the private charter operator or qualified human service organization may re-apply for registration on the FTA charter registration Web site.
 604.27   Complaints, answers, replies, and other documents.
(a) A registered charter provider, or its duly authorized representative (complainant), affected by an alleged noncompliance of this part may file a complaint with the Office of the Chief Counsel.
(b) Complaints filed under this subpart shall:
(1) Be titled Notice of Charter Service Complaint;
(2) State the name and address of each recipient that is the subject of the complaint and, with respect to each recipient, the specific provisions of this part that the complainant believes were violated;
(2) Be served in accordance with  604.31, along with all documents then available in the exercise of reasonable diligence, offered in support of the complaint, upon all recipients named in the complaint as being responsible for the alleged action(s) or omission(s) upon which the complaint is based;
(3) Provide a concise but complete statement of the facts relied upon to substantiate each allegation (complainant must show by a preponderance of the evidence that the recipient provided charter service and that such service did not fall within one of the exemptions or exceptions set out in this part);
(4) Describe how the complainant was directly and substantially affected by the things done or omitted by the recipients;
(5) Identify each registered charter provider associated with the complaint; and
(6) Be filed within 90 days after the alleged event giving rise to the complaint occurred.
(c) Unless the complaint is dismissed pursuant to  604.28 or  604.29, FTA shall notify the complainant, respondent, and state recipient, if applicable, within 30 days after the date FTA receives the complaint that the complaint has been docketed. Respondent shall have 30 days from the date of service of the FTA notification to file an answer.
(d) The complainant may file a reply within 20 days of the date of service of the respondent's answer.
(e) The respondent may file a rebuttal within 10 days of the date of service of the reply.
(f) The answer, reply, and rebuttal shall, like the complaint, be accompanied by the supporting documentation upon which the submitter relies.
(g) The answer shall deny or admit the allegations made in the complaint or state that the entity filing the document is without sufficient knowledge or information to admit or deny an allegation, and shall assert any affirmative defense.
(h) The answer, reply, and rebuttal shall each contain a concise but complete statement of the facts relied upon to substantiate the answers, admissions, denials, or averments made.
(i) The respondent's answer may include a motion to dismiss the complaint, or any portion thereof, with a supporting memorandum of points and authorities.
(j) The complainant may withdraw a complaint at any time after filing by serving a Notification of Withdrawal on the Chief Counsel and the respondent.
 604.28   Dismissals.
(a) Within 20 days after the receipt of a complaint described in  604.27, the Office of the Chief Counsel shall provide reasons for dismissing a complaint, or any claim in the complaint, with prejudice, under this section if:
(1) It appears on its face to be outside the jurisdiction of FTA under the Federal Transit Laws;
(2) On its face it does not state a claim that warrants an investigation or further action by FTA; or
(3) The complainant lacks standing to file a complaint under subparts B, C, or D of this part.
(b) [Reserved] 
 604.29   Incomplete complaints.
If a complaint is not dismissed under  604.28, but is deficient as to one or more of the requirements set forth in  604.27, the Office of the Chief Counsel may dismiss the complaint within 20 days after receiving it. Dismissal shall be without prejudice and the complainant may re-file after amendment to correct the deficiency. The Chief Counsel's dismissal shall include the reasons for the dismissal without prejudice.
 604.30   Filing complaints.
(a) Filing address. Unless provided otherwise, the complainant shall file the complaint with the Office of the Chief Counsel, 1200 New Jersey Ave., SE., Room E55-302, Washington, DC 20590 and file it electronically in the Charter Service Complaint docket number FTA-2007-0025 at  or mail it to the docket by sending the complaint to 1200 New Jersey Ave., SE., West Building Ground Floor, Room W12-140, Washington, DC 20590.
(b) Date and method of filing. Filing of any document shall be by personal delivery, U.S. mail, or overnight delivery with receipt confirmation. Unless the date is shown to be inaccurate, documents to be filed with FTA shall be deemed filed, on the earliest of:
(1) The date of personal delivery;
(2) The mailing date shown on the certificate of service;
(3) The date shown on the postmark if there is no certificate of service; or
(4) The mailing date shown by other evidence if there is no certificate of service and no postmark.
(c) E-mail or fax. A document sent by facsimile or e-mail shall not constitute service as described in  604.31.
(d) Number of copies. Unless otherwise specified, an executed original shall be filed with FTA.
(e) Form. Documents filed with FTA shall be typewritten or legibly printed. In the case of docketed proceedings, the document shall include a title and the docket number, as established by the Chief Counsel or Presiding Official, of the proceeding on the front page.
(f) Signing of documents and other papers. The original of every document filed shall be signed by the person filing it or the person's duly authorized representative. Subject to the enforcement provisions contained in this subpart, the signature shall serve as a certification that the signer has read the document and, based on reasonable inquiry, to the best of the signer's knowledge, information, and belief, the document is:
(1) Consistent with this part;
(2) Warranted by existing law or that a good faith argument exists for extension, modification, or reversal of existing law; and
(3) Not interposed for any improper purpose, such as to harass or to cause unnecessary delay or needless increase in the cost of the administrative process.
 604.31   Service.
(a) Designation of person to receive service. The initial document filed by the complainant shall state on the first page of the document for all parties to be served:
(1) The title of the document;
(2) The name, post office address, telephone number; and
(3) The facsimile number, if any, and e-mail address(es), if any.
If any of the above items change during the proceeding, the person shall promptly file notice of the change with FTA and the Presiding Official, if appropriate, and shall serve the notice on all other parties to the proceeding.
(b) Docket numbers. Each submission identified as a complaint under this part by the submitting party shall be filed in the Charter Service Complaint docket FTA-2007-0025.
(c) Who must be served. Copies of all documents filed with FTA shall be served by the entity filing them on all parties to the proceeding. A certificate of service shall accompany all documents when they are tendered for filing and shall certify concurrent service on FTA and all parties. Certificates of service shall be in substantially the following form:
I hereby certify that I have this day served the foregoing [name of document] on the following persons at the following addresses and e-mail or facsimile numbers (if also served by e-mail or facsimile) by [specify method of service]:
[list persons, addresses, and e-mail or facsimile numbers] 
Dated this ____ day of ____, 20__.
[signature], for [party]
(d) Method of service. Except as otherwise provided in  604.26, or agreed by the parties and the Presiding Official, as appropriate, the method of service is personal delivery or U.S. mail.
(e) Presumption of service. There shall be a presumption of lawful service:
(1) When acknowledgment of receipt is by a person who customarily or in the ordinary course of business receives mail at the address of the party or of the person designated under this section; or
(2) When a properly addressed envelope, sent to the last known address has been returned as undeliverable, unclaimed, or refused.
Subpart G - Investigations
 604.32   Investigation of complaint.
(a) If, based on the pleadings, there appears to be a reasonable basis for investigation, FTA shall investigate the subject matter of the complaint.
(b) The investigation may include a review of written submissions or pleadings of the parties, as supplemented by any informal investigation FTA considers necessary and by additional information furnished by the parties at FTA request. Each party shall file documents that it considers sufficient to present all relevant facts and argument necessary for FTA to determine whether the recipient is in compliance.
(c) The Chief Counsel shall send a notice to complainant(s) and respondent(s) once an investigation is complete, but not later than 90 days after receipt of the last pleading specified in  604.27 was due to FTA.
 604.33   Agency initiation of investigation.
(a) Notwithstanding any other provision under these regulations, FTA may initiate its own investigation of any matter within the applicability of this Part without having received a complaint. The investigation may include, without limitation, any of the actions described in  604.32.
(b) Following the initiation of an investigation under this section, FTA sends a notice to the entities subject to investigation. The notice will set forth the areas of FTA's concern and the reasons; request a response to the notice within 30 days of the date of service; and inform the respondent that FTA will, in its discretion, invite good faith efforts to resolve the matter.
(c) If the matters addressed in the FTA notice are not resolved informally, the Chief Counsel may refer the matter to a Presiding Official.
Subpart H - Decisions by FTA and Appointment of a Presiding Official (PO)
 604.34   Chief Counsel decisions and appointment of a PO.
(a) After receiving a complaint consistent with  604.27, and conducting an investigation, the Chief Counsel may:
(1) Issue a decision based on the pleadings filed to date;
(2) Appoint a PO to review the matter; or
(3) Dismiss the complaint pursuant to  604.28.
(b) If the Chief Counsel appoints a PO to review the matter, the Chief Counsel shall send out a hearing order that sets forth the following:
(1) The allegations in the complaint, or notice of investigation, and the chronology and results of the investigation preliminary to the hearing;
(2) The relevant statutory, judicial, regulatory, and other authorities;
(3) The issues to be decided;
(4) Such rules of procedure as may be necessary to supplement the provisions of this Part;
(5) The name and address of the PO, and the assignment of authority to the PO to conduct the hearing in accordance with the procedures set forth in this Part; and
(6) The date by which the PO is directed to issue a recommended decision.
 604.35   Separation of functions.
(a) Proceedings under this part shall be handled by an FTA attorney, except that the Chief Counsel may appoint a PO, who may not be an FTA attorney.
(b) After issuance of an initial decision by the Chief Counsel, the FTA employee or contractor engaged in the performance of investigative or prosecutorial functions in a proceeding under this part shall not, in that case or a factually related case, participate or give advice in a final decision by the Administrator or his or her designee on written appeal, and shall not, except as counsel or as witness in the public proceedings, engage in any substantive communication regarding that case or a related case with the Administrator on written appeal.
Subpart I - Hearings
 604.36   Powers of a PO.
A PO may:
(a) Give notice of, and hold, pre-hearing conferences and hearings;
(b) Administer oaths and affirmations;
(c) Issue notices of deposition requested by the parties;
(d) Limit the frequency and extent of discovery;
(e) Rule on offers of proof;
(f) Receive relevant and material evidence;
(g) Regulate the course of the hearing in accordance with the rules of this part to avoid unnecessary and duplicative proceedings in the interest of prompt and fair resolution of the matters at issue;
(h) Hold conferences to settle or to simplify the issues by consent of the parties;
(i) Dispose of procedural motions and requests;
(j) Examine witnesses; and
(k) Make findings of fact and conclusions of law and issue a recommended decision.
 604.37   Appearances, parties, and rights of parties.
(a) Any party to the hearing may appear and be heard in person and any party to the hearing may be accompanied, represented, or advised by an attorney licensed by a State, the District of Columbia, or a territory of the United States to practice law or appear before the courts of that State or territory, or by another duly authorized representative. An attorney, or other duly authorized representative, who represents a party shall file according to the filing and service procedures contained in  604.30 and  604.31.
(b) The parties to the hearing are the respondent(s) named in the hearing order, the complainant(s), and FTA, as represented by the PO.
(c) The parties to the hearing may agree to extend for a reasonable period of time the time for filing a document under this part. If the parties agree, the PO shall grant one extension of time to each party. The party seeking the extension of time shall submit a draft order to the PO to be signed by the PO and filed with the hearing docket. The PO may grant additional oral requests for an extension of time where the parties agree to the extension.
(d) An extension of time granted by the PO for any reason extends the due date for the PO's recommended decision and for the final agency decision by the length of time in the PO's extension.
 604.38   Discovery.
(a) Permissible forms of discovery shall be within the discretion of the PO.
(b) The PO shall limit the frequency and extent of discovery permitted by this section if a party shows that:
(1) The information requested is cumulative or repetitious;
(2) The information requested may be obtained from another less burdensome and more convenient source;
(3) The party requesting the information has had ample opportunity to obtain the information through other discovery methods permitted under this section; or
(4) The method or scope of discovery requested by the party is unduly burdensome or expensive.
 604.39   Depositions.
(a) For good cause shown, the PO may order that the testimony of a witness may be taken by deposition and that the witness produce documentary evidence in connection with such testimony. Generally, an order to take the deposition of a witness is entered only if:
(1) The person whose deposition is to be taken would be unavailable at the hearing;
(2) The deposition is deemed necessary to perpetuate the testimony of the witness; or
(3) The taking of the deposition is necessary to prevent undue and excessive expense to a party and will not result in undue burden to other parties or in undue delay.
(b) Any party to the hearing desiring to take the deposition of a witness according to the terms set out in this subpart, shall file a motion with the PO, with a copy of the motion served on each party. The motion shall include:
(1) The name and residence of the witness;
(2) The time and place for the taking of the proposed deposition;
(3) The reasons why such deposition should be taken; and
(4) A general description of the matters concerning which the witness will be asked to testify.
(c) If good cause is shown in the motion, the PO in his or her discretion, issues an order authorizing the deposition and specifying the name of the witness to be deposed, the location and time of the deposition and the general scope and subject matter of the testimony to be taken.
(d) Witnesses whose testimony is taken by deposition shall be sworn or shall affirm before any questions are put to them. Each question propounded shall be recorded and the answers of the witness transcribed verbatim. The written transcript shall be subscribed by the witness, unless the parties by stipulation waive the signing, or the witness is ill, cannot be found, or refuses to sign. The reporter shall note the reason for failure to sign.
 604.40   Public disclosure of evidence.
(a) Except as provided in this section, the hearing shall be open to the public.
(b) The PO may order that any information contained in the record be withheld from public disclosure. Any person may object to disclosure of information in the record by filing a written motion to withhold specific information with the PO. The person shall state specific grounds for nondisclosure in the motion.
(c) The PO shall grant the motion to withhold information from public disclosure if the PO determines that disclosure would be in violation of the Privacy Act, would reveal trade secrets or privileged or confidential commercial or financial information, or is otherwise prohibited by law.
 604.41   Standard of proof.
The PO shall issue a recommended decision or shall rule in a party's favor only if the decision or ruling is supported by a preponderance of the evidence.
 604.42   Burden of proof.
(a) The burden of proof of noncompliance with this part, determination, or agreement issued under the authority of the Federal Transit Laws is on the registered charter provider.
(b) Except as otherwise provided by statute or rule, the proponent of a motion, request, or order has the burden of proof.
 604.43   Offer of proof.
A party whose evidence has been excluded by a ruling of the PO, during a hearing in which the respondent had an opportunity to respond to the offer of proof, may offer the evidence on the record when filing an appeal.
 604.44   Record.
(a) The transcript of all testimony in the hearing, all exhibits received into evidence, all motions, applications requests and rulings, and all documents included in the hearing record shall constitute the exclusive record for decision in the proceedings and the basis for the issuance of any orders.
(b) Any interested person may examine the record by entering the docket number at  or after payment of reasonable costs for search and reproduction of the record.
 604.45   Waiver of procedures.
(a) The PO shall waive such procedural steps as all parties to the hearing agree to waive before issuance of an initial decision.
(b) Consent to a waiver of any procedural step bars the raising of this issue on appeal.
(c) The parties may not by consent waive the obligation of the PO to enter a recommended decision on the record.
 604.46   Recommended decision by a PO.
(a) The PO shall issue a recommended decision based on the record developed during the proceeding and shall send the recommended decision to the Chief Counsel for ratification or modification not later than 110 days after the referral from the Chief Counsel.
(b) The Chief Counsel shall ratify or modify the PO's recommended decision within 30 days of receiving the recommended decision. The Chief Counsel shall serve his or her decision, which is capable of being appealed to the Administrator, on all parties to the proceeding.
 604.47   Remedies.
(a) If the Chief Counsel determines that a violation of this part occurred, he or she may take one or more of the following actions:
(1) Bar the recipient from receiving future Federal financial assistance from FTA;
(2) Order the withholding of a reasonable percentage of available Federal financial assistance; or
(3) Pursue suspension and debarment of the recipient, its employees, or its contractors.
(b) In determining the type and amount of remedy, the Chief Counsel shall consider the following factors:
(1) The nature and circumstances of the violation;
(2) The extent and gravity of the violation (extent of deviation from regulatory requirements);
(3) The revenue earned (economic benefit) by providing the charter service;
(4) The operating budget of the recipient;
(5) Such other matters as justice may require; and
(6) Whether a recipient provided service described in a cease and desist order after issuance of such order by the Chief Counsel.
(c) The Chief Counsel office may mitigate the remedy when the recipient can document corrective action of alleged violation. The Chief Counsel's decision to mitigate a remedy shall be determined on the basis of how much corrective action was taken by the recipient and when it was taken. Systemic action to prevent future violations will be given greater consideration than action simply to remedy violations identified during FTA's inspection or identified in a complaint.
(d) In the event the Chief Counsel finds a pattern of violations, the remedy ordered shall bar a recipient from receiving Federal transit assistance in an amount that the Chief Counsel considers appropriate.
(e) The Chief Counsel may make a decision to withhold Federal financial assistance in a lump sum or over a period of time not to exceed five years.
Subpart J - Appeal to Administrator and Final Agency Orders
 604.48   Appeal from Chief Counsel decision.
(a) Each party adversely affected by the Chief Counsel's office decision may file an appeal with the Administrator within 21 days of the date of the Chief Counsel's issued his or her decision. Each party may file a reply to an appeal within 21 days after it is served on the party. Filing and service of appeals and replies shall be by personal delivery consistent with  604.30 and 604.31.
(b) If an appeal is filed, the Administrator reviews the entire record and issues a final agency decision based on the record that either accepts, rejects, or modifies the Chief Counsel's decision within 30 days of the due date of the reply. If no appeal is filed, the Administrator may take review of the case on his or her own motion. If the Administrator finds that the respondent is not in compliance with this part, the final agency order shall include a statement of corrective action, if appropriate, and identify remedies.
(c) If no appeal is filed, and the Administrator does not take review of the decision by the office on the Administrator's own motion, the Chief Counsel's decision shall take effect as the final agency decision and order on the twenty-first day after the actual date the Chief Counsel's decision was issued.
(d) The failure to file an appeal is deemed a waiver of any rights to seek judicial review of the Chief Counsel's decision that becomes a final agency decision by operation of paragraph (c) of this section.
 604.49   Administrator's discretionary review of the Chief Counsel's decision.
(a) If the Administrator takes review on the Administrator's own motion, the Administrator shall issue a notice of review by the twenty-first day after the actual date of the Chief Counsel's decision that contains the following information:
(1) The notice sets forth the specific findings of fact and conclusions of law in the decision subject to review by the Administrator.
(2) Parties may file one brief on review to the Administrator or rely on their post-hearing briefs to the Chief Counsel's office. Briefs on review shall be filed not later than 10 days after service of the notice of review. Filing and service of briefs on review shall be by personal delivery consistent with  604.30 and  604.31.
(3) The Administrator issues a final agency decision and order within 30 days of the due date of the briefs on review. If the Administrator finds that the respondent is not in compliance with this part, the final agency order shall include a statement of corrective action, if appropriate, and identify remedies.
(b) If the Administrator takes review on the Administrator's own motion, the decision of the Chief Counsel is stayed pending a final decision by the Administrator.
Subpart K - Judicial Review
 604.50   Judicial review of a final decision and order.
(a) A person may seek judicial review in an appropriate United States District Court of a final decision and order of the Administrator as provided in 5 U.S.C. 701-706. A party seeking judicial review of a final decision and order shall file a petition for review with the Court not later than 60 days after a final decision and order is effective.
(b) The following do not constitute final decisions and orders subject to judicial review:
(1) FTA's decision to dismiss a complaint as set forth in  604.29;
(2) A recommended decision issued by a PO at the conclusion of a hearing; or
(3) A Chief Counsel decision that becomes the final decision of the Administrator because it was not appealed within the stated timeframes.
 
Appendix A to Part 604 - Listing of Human Service Federal Financial Assistance Programs 
Federal Programs Providing Transportation Assistance 
1Food Stamp, Employment and Training ProgramFood and Nutrition ServiceDepartment of Agriculture.
2Voluntary Public School ChoiceOffice of Innovation and ImprovementDepartment of Education.
3Assistance for Education of All Children with Disabilities - IDEAOffice of Special Education and Rehabilitative ServicesDepartment of Education.
4Centers for Independent LivingOffice of Special Education and Rehabilitative ServicesDepartment of Education.
5Independent Living for Older Individuals Who Are BlindOffice of Special Education and Rehabilitative ServicesDepartment of Education.
6Independent Living State GrantsOffice of Special Education and Rehabilitative ServicesDepartment of Education.
7Supported Employment Services for Individuals with Most Significant DisabilitiesOffice of Special Education and Rehabilitative ServicesDepartment of Education.
8Vocational Rehabilitative GrantsOffice of Special Education and Rehabilitative ServicesDepartment of Education.
9Social Service Block GrantAdministration for Children and FamiliesDepartment of Health and Human Services.
10Child Care and Development FundAdministration for Children and FamiliesDepartment of Health and Human Services.
11Head StartAdministration for Children and FamiliesDepartment of Health and Human Services.
12Refugee and Entrant Assistance Discretionary GrantsAdministration for Children and FamiliesDepartment of Health and Human Services.
13Refugee and Entrant Assistance State Administered ProgramsAdministration for Children and FamiliesDepartment of Health and Human Services.
14Refugee and Entrant Targeted AssistanceAdministration for Children and FamiliesDepartment of Health and Human Services.
15Refugee and Entrant Assistance Voluntary Agency ProgramsAdministration for Children and FamiliesDepartment of Health and Human Services.
16State Development Disabilities Council and Protection & AdvocacyAdministration for Children and FamiliesDepartment of Health and Human Services.
17Temporary Assistance to Needy FamiliesAdministration for Children and FamiliesDepartment of Health and Human Services.
18Community Services Block GrantAdministration for Children and FamiliesDepartment of Health and Human Services.
19Promoting Safe and Stable FamiliesAdministration for Children and FamiliesDepartment of Health and Human Services.
20Developmental Disabilities Projects of National SignificanceAdministration for Children and FamiliesDepartment of Health and Human Services.
21Grants for Supportive Services and Senior CentersAdministration on AgingDepartment of Health and Human Services.
22Programs for American Indian, Alaskan Native and Native Hawaii EldersAdministration on AgingDepartment of Health and Human Services.
23MedicaidCenters for Medicaid and MedicareDepartment of Health and Human Services.
24State Health Insurance ProgramCenters for Medicaid and MedicareDepartment of Health and Human Services.
25Home and Community Base WaiverCenters for Medicaid and MedicareDepartment of Health and Human Services.
26Community Health CentersHealth Resources and Services AdministrationDepartment of Health and Human Services.
27Healthy CommunitiesHealth Resources and Services AdministrationDepartment of Health and Human Services.
28HIV Care Formula ProgramHealth Resources and Services AdministrationDepartment of Health and Human Services.
29Maternal and Child Health Block GrantHealth Resources and Services AdministrationDepartment of Health and Human Services.
30Rural Health Care NetworkHealth Resources and Services AdministrationDepartment of Health and Human Services.
31Rural Health Care Outreach ProgramHealth Resources and Services AdministrationDepartment of Health and Human Services.
32Health Start InitiativeHealth Resources and Services AdministrationDepartment of Health and Human Services.
33Ryan White Care Act ProgramsHealth Resources and Services AdministrationDepartment of Health and Human Services.
34Substance Abuse Prevention and Treatment Block GrantSubstance Abuse and Mental Health Services AdministrationDepartment of Health and Human Services.
35Prevention and Texas Block GrantSubstance Abuse and Mental Health Services AdministrationDepartment of Health and Human Services.
36Community Development Block GrantCommunity Planning and DevelopmentDepartment of Housing and Urban Development.
37Housing Opportunities for Persons with AIDSCommunity Planning and DevelopmentDepartment of Housing and Urban Development.
38Supportive Housing ProgramCommunity Planning and DevelopmentDepartment of Housing and Urban Development.
39Revitalization of Severely Distressed Public HousingPublic and Indian HousingDepartment of Housing and Urban Development.
40Indian Employment AssistanceBureau of Indian AffairsDepartment of the Interior.
41Indian Employment, Training, and Related ServicesBureau of Indian AffairsDepartment of the Interior.
42Black Lung BenefitsEmployment Standards AdministrationDepartment of Labor.
43Senior Community Services Employment ProgramEmployment Standards AdministrationDepartment of Labor.
44Job CorpsEmployment and Training AdministrationDepartment of Labor.
45Migrant and Seasonal Farm WorkerEmployment and Training AdministrationDepartment of Labor.
46Native American Employment and TrainingEmployment and Training AdministrationDepartment of Labor.
47Welfare to Work Grants for TribesEmployment and Training AdministrationDepartment of Labor.
48Welfare to Work for States and LocalsEmployment and Training AdministrationDepartment of Labor.
49Work Incentive GrantsEmployment and Training AdministrationDepartment of Labor.
50Workforce Investment Act Adult Services ProgramEmployment and Training AdministrationDepartment of Labor.
51Workforce Investment Act Adult Dislocated Worker ProgramEmployment and Training AdministrationDepartment of Labor.
52Workforce Investment Act Youth Activities ProgramEmployment and Training AdministrationDepartment of Labor.
53Homeless Veterans Reintegration ProgramVeterans Employment & Training ServiceDepartment of Labor.
54Veterans Employment ProgramVeterans Employment & Training ServiceDepartment of Labor.
55Elderly and Persons with DisabilityFederal Transit AdministrationDepartment of Transportation.
56New Freedom ProgramFederal Transit AdministrationDepartment of Transportation.
57Job Access and Reverse Commute ProgramFederal Transit AdministrationDepartment of Transportation.
58Non-Urbanized Area ProgramFederal Transit AdministrationDepartment of Transportation.
59Capital Discretionary ProgramFederal Transit AdministrationDepartment of Transportation.
60Urbanized Area Formula ProgramFederal Transit AdministrationDepartment of Transportation.
61Automobiles and Adaptive EquipmentVeterans Benefits AdministrationDepartment of Veterans Affairs.
62Homeless Provider GrantsVeterans Health AdministrationDepartment of Veterans Affairs.
63Veterans Medical Care BenefitsVeterans Health AdministrationDepartment of Veterans Affairs.
64Ticket to Work ProgramSocial Security AdministrationDepartment of Veterans Affairs.
Appendix B to Part 604 - Reasons for Removal
The following is guidance on the terms contained in section 604.26(d) concerning reasons for which FTA may remove a registered charter provider or a qualified human service organization from the FTA charter registration Web site.
What is bad faith?
Bad faith is the actual or constructive fraud or a design to mislead or deceive another or a neglect or refusal to fulfill a duty or contractual obligation. It is not an honest mistake. Black's Law Dictionary, Revised Fourth Edition, West Publishing Company, St. Paul, Minn., 1968.
For example, it would be bad faith for a registered charter provider to respond to a recipient's notification to registered charter providers of a charter service opportunity stating that it would provide the service with no actual intent to perform the charter service. It would also be bad faith if the registered charter provider fails to contact the customer or provide a quote for charter service within a reasonable time. Typically, if a registered charter provider fails to contact a customer or fails to provide a price quote to the customer at least 14 business days before an event, then FTA may remove the registered charter provider from the registration Web site, which would allow a transit agency to step back in to provide the service because the registered charter provider's response to the email would no longer be effective because it is not registered.
Further, it would be bad faith for a registered charter provider to submit a quote for charter services knowing that the price is three to four times higher because of the distance the registered charter provider must travel (deadhead time). In those situations, FTA may interpret such quotes as bad faith because they appear to be designed to prevent the local transit agency from providing the service.
On the other hand, FTA would not interpret an honest mistake of fact as bad faith. For example, if a registered charter provider fails to provide charter service in response to a recipient's notification when it honestly mistook the date, place or time the service was to be provided. It would not be bad faith if the registered charter provider responded affirmatively to the email notification sent by the public transit agency, but then later learned it could not perform the service and provided the transit agency reasonable notice of its changed circumstances.
What is fraud?
Fraud is the suggestion or assertion of a fact that is not true, by one who has no reasonable ground for believing it to be true; the suppression of a fact by one who is bound to disclose it; one who gives information of other facts which are likely to mislead; or a promise made without any intention of performing it. Black's Law Dictionary, Revised Fourth Edition, West Publishing Company, St. Paul, Minn., 1968.
Examples of fraud include but are not limited to: (1) A registered charter provider indicates that it has a current state or Federal safety certification when it knows that it does not in fact have one; (2) a broker that owns no charter vehicles registers as a registered charter provider; or (3) a qualified human service organization represents that its serves the needs of the elderly, persons with disabilities, or lower-income individuals, but, in fact, only serves those populations tangentially.
What is a lapse of insurance?
A lapse of insurance occurs when there is no policy of insurance is in place. This may occur when there has been default in payment of premiums on an insurance policy and the policy is no longer in force. In addition, no other policy of insurance has taken its place. Black's Law Dictionary, Revised Fourth Edition, West Publishing Company, St. Paul, Minn., 1968.
What is a lapse of other documentation?
A lapse of other documentation means for example, but is not limited to, failure to have or loss or revocation of business license, operating authority, failure to notify of current company name, address, phone number, email address and facsimile number, failure to have a current state or Federal safety certification, or failure to provide accurate Federal or state motor carrier identifying number. Black's Law Dictionary, Revised Fourth Edition, West Publishing Company, St. Paul, Minn., 1968.
What is a complaint that does not state a claim that warrants an investigation or further action by FTA?
A complaint is a document describing a specific instance that allegedly constitutes a violation of the charter service regulations set forth in 49 CFR 604.28. More than one complaint may be contained in the same document. A complaint does not state a claim that warrants investigation when the allegations made in the complaint, without considering any extraneous material or matter, do not raise a genuine issue as to any material question of fact, and based on the undisputed facts stated in the complaint, there is no violation of the charter service statute or regulation as a matter of law. Based on Federal Rules of Civil Procedure, Rule 56(c).
Examples of complaints that would not warrant an investigation or further action by FTA include but are not limited to: (1) A complaint against a public transit agency that does not receive FTA funding; (2) a complaint brought against a public transit agency by a private charter operator that is neither a registered charter provider nor its duly authorized representative; (3) a complaint that gives no information as to when or where the alleged prohibited charter service took place; or (4) a complaint filed solely for the purpose of harassing the public transit agency.
Appendix C to Part 604 - Frequently Asked Questions
(a) Applicability (49 CFR Section 604.2)
(1) Q: If the requirements of the charter rule are not applicable to me for a particular service I provide, do I have to report that service in my quarterly report?
A: No. If the service you propose to provide meets one of the exemptions contained in this section, you do not have to report the service in your quarterly report.
(2) Q: If I receive funds under 49 U.S.C. Sections 5310, 5311, 5316, or 5317, may I provide charter service for any purpose?
A: No. You may only provide charter service for program purposes, which is defined in this regulation as transportation that serves the needs of either human service agencies or targeted populations (elderly, individuals with disabilities, and/or low income individuals) * * * 49 CFR Section 604.2(e). Thus, your service only qualifies for the exemption contained in this section if the service is designed to serve the needs of targeted populations. Charter service provided to a group, however, that includes individuals who are only incidentally members of those targeted populations, is not for program purposes and must meet the requirements of the rule (for example, an individual chartering a vehicle to take his relatives including elderly aunts and a cousin who is a disabled veteran to a family reunion).
(3) Q: If I am providing service for program purposes under one of the FTA programs listed in 604.2.(e), do the human service organizations have to register on the FTA Charter Registration Web site?
A: No. Because the service is exempt from the charter regulations, the organization does not have to register on the FTA Charter Registration Web site.
(4) Q: What if there is an emergency such as an apartment fire or tanker truck spill that requires an immediate evacuation, but the President, Governor, or Mayor never declares it as an emergency? Can a transit agency still assist in the evacuation efforts?
A: Yes. One part of the emergency exemption is designed to allow transit agencies to participate in emergency situations without worrying about complying with the charter regulations. Since transit agencies are often uniquely positioned to respond to such emergencies, the charter regulations do not apply. This is true whether or not the emergency is officially declared.
(5) Q: Do emergency situations involve requests from the Secret Service or the police department to transport its employees?
A. Generally no. Transporting the Secret Service or police officers for non-emergency preparedness or planning exercises does not qualify for the exemption under this section. In addition, if the Secret Service or the police department requests that a transit agency provide service when there is no immediate emergency, then the transit agency must comply with the charter service regulations.
(6) Q: Can a transit agency provide transportation to transit employees for an event such as the funeral of a transit employee or the transit agency's annual picnic?
A: Yes. These events do not fall within the definition of charter, because while the service is exclusive, it is not provided at the request of a third party and it is not at a negotiated price. Furthermore, a transit agency transporting its own employees to events sponsored by the transit agency for employee morale purposes or to events directly related to internal employee relations such as a funeral of an employee, or to the transit agency's picnic, is paying for these services as part of the transit agency's own administrative overhead.
(7) Q: Is sightseeing service considered to be charter?
A: Sightseeing is a different type of service than charter service. Sightseeing service is regularly scheduled round trip service to see the sights, which is often accompanied by a narrative guide and is open to the public for a set price. Public transit agencies may not provide sightseeing service with federally funded assets or assistance because it falls outside the definition of public transportation under 49 U.S.C. Section 5302(a) (10), unless FTA provides written concurrence for that service as an approved incidental use. While, in general, sightseeing service does not constitute charter service, sightseeing service that also meets the definition of charter service would be prohibited, even as an incidental use.
(8) Q: If a private provider receives Federal funds from one of the listed programs in this section, does that mean the private provider cannot use its privately owned equipment to provide charter service?
A: No. A private provider may still provide charter services even though it receives Federal funds under one of the programs listed in this section. The charter regulations only apply to a private provider during the time period when it is providing public transportation services under contract with a public transit agency.
(9) Q: What does FTA mean by the phrase non-FTA funded activities?
A: Non-FTA funded activities are those activities that are not provided under contract or other arrangement with a public transit agency using FTA funds.
(10) Q: How does a private provider know whether an activity is FTA-funded or not?
A: The private provider should refer to the contract with the public transit agency to understand the services that are funded with Federal dollars.
(11) Q: What if the service is being provided under a capital cost of contracting scenario?
A: When a private operator receives FTA funds through capital cost of contracting, the only expenses attributed to FTA are those related to the transit service provided. The principle of capital cost of contracting is to pay for the capital portion of the privately owned assets used in public transportation (including a share of preventive maintenance costs attributable to the use of the vehicle in the contracted transit service). When a private operator uses that same privately owed vehicle in non-FTA funded service, such as charter service, the preventive maintenance and capital depreciation are not paid by FTA, so the charter rule does not apply.
(12) Q: What if the service is provided under a turn-key scenario?
A: To the extent the private charter provider is standing in the shoes of the public transit agency, the charter rules apply. Under a turn-key contract, where the private operator provides and operates a dedicated transit fleet, then the private provider must abide by the charter regulations for the transit part of its business. The charter rule would not apply, however, to other aspects of that private provider's business. FTA also recognizes that a private operator may use vehicles in its fleet interchangeably. So long as the operator is providing the number, type, and quality of vehicles contractually required to be provided exclusively for transit use and is not using FTA funds to cross-subsidize private charter service, the private operator may manage its fleet according to best business practice.
(13) Q: Does FTA's rule prohibit a private provider from providing charter service when its privately owned vehicles are not engaged in providing public transportation?
A: No. The charter rule is only applicable to the actual public transit service provided by the private operator. As stated in 49 CFR 604.2(c), the rule does not apply to the non-FTA funded activities of private charter operators. The intent of this provision was to isolate the impacts of the charter rule on private operators to those instances where they stood in the shoes of a transit agency.
(14) Q: May a private provider use vehicles whose acquisition was federally funded to provide private charter services?
A: It depends. A private provider, who is a sub-recipient or sub-grantee, when not engaged in providing public transit using federally funded vehicles, may provide charter services using federally funded vehicles only in conformance with the charter regulations. Vehicles, whose only federal funding was for accessibility equipment, are not considered to be federally funded vehicles in this context. In other words, vehicles, whose lifts are only funded under FTA programs, may be used in charter service.
(15) Q: May a public transit agency provide seasonal service (e.g., service May through September for the summer beach season)?
A: Seasonal service that is regular and continuing, available to the public, and controlled by the public transit agency meets the definition of public transportation and is not charter service. The service should have a regular schedule and be planned in the same manner as all the other routes, except that it is run only during the periods when there is sufficient demand to justify public transit service; for example, the winter ski season or summer beach season. Seasonal service is distinguishable from charter service provided for a special event or function that occurs on an irregular basis or for a limited duration, because the seasonal transit service is regular and continuing and the demand for service is not triggered by an event or function. In addition, seasonal service is generally more than a month or two, and the schedule is consistent from year to year, based on calendar or climate, rather than being scheduled around a specific event.
(b) Definitions (49 CFR Section 604.3)
(16) Q: The definition of charter service does not include demand response services, but what happens if a group of individuals request demand response service?
A: Demand response trips provide service from multiple origins to a single destination, a single origin to multiple destinations, or even multiple origins to multiple destinations. These types of trips are considered demand response transit service, not charter service, because even though a human service agency pays for the transportation of its clients, trips are scheduled and routed for the individuals in the group. Service to individuals can be identified by vehicle routing that includes multiple origins, multiple destinations, or both, based on the needs of individual members of the group, rather than the group as a whole. For example, demand response service that takes all of the members of a group home on an annual excursion to a baseball game. Some sponsored trips carried out as part of a Coordinated Human Services Transportation Plan, such as trips for Head Start, assisted living centers, or sheltered workshops may even be provided on an exclusive basis where clients of a particular agency cannot be mixed with members of the general public or clients of other agencies for safety or other reasons specific to the needs of the human service clients.
(17) Q: Is it charter if a demand response transit service carries a group of individuals with disabilities from a single origin to a single destination on a regular basis?
A: No. Daily subscription trips between a group living facility for persons with developmental disabilities to a sheltered workshop where the individuals work, or weekly trips from the group home to a recreation center is special transportation and not considered charter service. These trips are regular and continuous and do not meet the definition of charter.
(18) Q: If a third party requests charter service for the exclusive use of a bus or van, but the transit agency provides the service free of charge, is it charter?
A: No. The definition of charter service under 49 CFR Section 604.3(c) (1), requires a negotiated price, which implies an exchange of money. Thus, free service does not meet the negotiated price requirement. Transit agencies should note, however, that a negotiated price could be the regular fixed route fare or when a third party indirectly pays for the regular fare.
(19) Q: If a transit agency accepts a subsidy for providing shuttle service for an entire baseball season, is that charter?
A: Yes. Even though there are many baseball games over several months, the service is still to an event or function on an irregular basis or for a limited duration for which a third party pays in whole or in part. In order to provide the service, a transit agency must first provide notice to registered charter providers.
(20) Q: If a transit agency contracts with a third party to provide free shuttle service during football games for persons with disabilities, is that charter?
A: Yes. Even though the service is for persons with disabilities, the transit agency receives payment from a third party for an event or function that occurs on an irregular basis or for a limited duration. In order for a transit agency to provide the service, it must provide notice to the list of registered charter providers first.
(21) Q: What if a business park pays the transit agency to add an additional stop on its fixed route to include the business park, is that charter?
A: No. The service is not to an event or function and it does not occur on an irregular basis or for a limited duration.
(22) Q: What if a university pays the transit agency to expand its regular fixed route to include stops on the campus, is that charter?
A: No. The service is not to an event or function and it does not occur on an irregular basis or for a limited duration.
(23) Q: What if a university pays the transit agency to provide shuttle service that does not connect to the transit agency's regular routes, is that charter?
A: Yes. The service is provided at the request of a third party, the university, for the exclusive use of a bus or van by the university students and faculty for a negotiated price.
(24) Q: What if the university pays the transit agency to provide shuttle service to football games and graduation, is that charter?
A: Yes. The service is to an event or function that occurs on an irregular basis or for a limited duration. As such, in order to provide the service, a transit agency must provide notice to the list of registered charter providers.
(25) Q: What happens if a transit agency does not have fixed route service to determine whether the fare charged is a premium fare?
A: A transit agency should compare the proposed fare to what it might charge for a similar trip under a demand response scenario.
(26) Q: How can a transit agency tell if the fare is premium?
A: The transit agency should analyze its regular fares to determine whether the fare charged is higher than its regular fare for comparable services. For example, if the transit agency proposes to provide an express shuttle service to football games, it should look at the regular fares charged for express shuttles of similar distance elsewhere in the transit system. In addition, the service may be charter if the transit agency charges a lower fare or no fare because of a third party subsidy.
(27) Q: What if a transit agency charges a customer an up front special event fare that includes the outbound and inbound trips, is that a premium fare?
A: It depends. If the transit agency charges the outbound and inbound fares up front, but many customers don't travel both directions, then the fare may be premium. This would not be true generally for park and ride lots, where the customer parks his or her car, and, would most likely use transit to return to the same lot. Under that scenario, the transit agency may collect the regular outbound and inbound fare up front.
(28) Q: What if a transit agency wishes to create a special pass for an event or function on an irregular basis or for a limited duration that allows a customer to ride the transit system several times for the duration of the event, is that charter?
A: It depends. If the special pass costs more than the fare for a reasonable number of expected individual trips during the event, then the special pass represents a premium fare. FTA will also consider whether a third party provides a subsidy for the service.
(29) Q: Is it a third party subsidy if a third party collects the regular fixed route fare for the transit agency?
A. Generally no. If the service provided is not at the request of a third party for the exclusive use of a bus or van, then a third party collecting the fare would not qualify the service as charter. But, a transit agency has to consider carefully whether the service is at the request of an event planner. For example, a group offers to make passes for its organization and then later work out the payment to the transit agency. The transit agency can only collect the regular fare for each passenger.
(30) Q: If the transit agency is part of the local government and an agency within the local government pays for service to an event or function of limited duration or that occurs on an irregular basis, is that charter?
A: Yes. Since the agency pays for the charter service, whether by direct payment or transfer of funds through internal local government accounts, it represents a third party payment for charter service. Thus, the service would meet the definition of charter service under 49 CFR Section 604.3(c) (1).
(31) Q: What if an organization requests and pays for service through an in-kind payment such as paying for a new bus shelter or providing advertising, is that charter?
A: Yes. The service is provided at the request of a third party for a negotiated price, which would be the cost of a new bus shelter or advertising. The key here is the direct payment for service to an event or function. For instance, advertising that appears on buses for regular service does not make it charter.
(32) Q: Under the definition of Government Officials, does the government official have to currently hold an office in government?
A: Yes. In order to take advantage of the Government Official exception, the individual must hold currently a government position that is elected or appointed through a political process.
(33) Q: Does a university qualify as a QHSO?
A: No. Most universities do not have a mission of serving the needs of the elderly, persons with disabilities, or low income individuals.
(34) Q: Do the Boy Scouts of America qualify as a QHSO?
A: No. The Boy Scouts of America's mission is not to serve the needs of the elderly, persons with disabilities, or low income individuals.
(35) Q: What qualifies as indirect financial assistance?
A: The inclusion of indirect financial assistance as part of the definition of recipient covers subrecipients. In other words, subrecipients are subject to the charter regulation. FTA modified the definition of recipient in the final rule to clarify this point.
(c) Exceptions (49 CFR Subpart B)
(36) Q: In order to take advantage of the Government Officials exception, does a transit agency have to transport only elected or appointed government officials?
A: No, but there has to be at least one elected or appointed government official on the trip.
(37) Q: If a transit agency provides notice regarding a season's worth of service and some of the service will occur in less than 30 days, does a registered charter provider have to respond within 72 hours or 14 days?
A: A transit agency should provide as much notice as possible for service that occurs over several months. Thus, a transit agency should provide notice to registered charter providers more than 30 days in advance of the service, which would give registered charter provider 14 days to respond to the notice. Under pressure to begin the service sooner, the transit agency could provide a separate notice for only that portion of the service occurring in less than 30 days.
(38) Q: Does a transit agency have to contact registered charter providers in order to petition the Administrator for an event of regional or national significance?
A: Yes. A petition for an event of regional or national significance must demonstrate that not only has the public transit agency contacted registered charter providers, but also demonstrate how the transit agency will include registered charter providers in providing the service to the event of regional or national significance.
(39) Q: Where does a transit agency have to file its petition?
A: A transit agency must file the petition with the ombudsman at ombudsman.charterservice@dot.gov. FTA will file all petitions in the Petitions to the Administrator docket (FTA-2007-0022) at 
(40) Q: What qualifies as a unique and time sensitive event?
A: In order to petition the Administrator for a discretionary exception, a public transit agency must demonstrate that the event is unique or that circumstances are such that there is not enough time to check with registered charter providers. Events that occur on an annual basis are generally not considered unique or time sensitive.
(41) Q: Is there any particular format for quarterly reports for exceptions?
A: No. The report must contain the information required by the regulations and clearly identify the exception under which the transit agency performed the service.
(42) Q: May a transit agency lease its vehicles to one registered charter provider if there is another registered charter provider that can perform all of the requested service with private charter vehicles?
A: No. A transit agency may not lease its vehicles to one registered charter provider when there is another registered charter provider that can perform all of the requested service. In that case, the transit vehicles would enable the first registered charter provider to charge less for the service than the second registered charter provider that uses all private charter vehicles.
(43) Q: Where do I submit my reports?
A: FTA has adapted its electronic grants making system, TEAM, to include charter rule reporting. Grantees should file the required reports through TEAM. These reports will be available to the public through FTA's charter bus service Web page at:  State Departments of Transportation are responsible for filing charter reports on behalf of its subrecipients that do not have access to TEAM.
(d) Registration and Notification (49 CFR Subpart C)
(44) Q: May a private provider register to receive notice of charter service requests from all 50 States?
A: Yes. A private provider may register to receive notice from all 50 States; however, a private provider should only register for those states for which it can realistically originate service.
(45) Q: May a registered charter provider select which portions of the service it would like to provide?
A: No. A registered charter provider may not cherry pick the service described in the notice. In other words, if the e-mail notification describes service for an entire football season, then a registered charter provider that responds to the notice indicating it can provide only a couple of weekends of service would be non-responsive to the e-mail notice. Public transit agencies may, however, include several individual charter events in the e-mail notification. Under those circumstances, a registered charter provider may select from those individual events to provide service.
(46) Q: May a transit agency include information on special requests from the customer in the notice to registered charter providers?
A: No. A transit agency must strictly follow the requirements of 49 CFR Section 604.14, otherwise the notice is void. A transit agency may, however, provide a generalized statement such as Please do not respond to this notice if you are not interested or cannot perform the service in its entirety.
(47) Q: What happens if a transit agency sends out a notice regarding charter service, but later decides to perform the service free of charge and without a third party subsidy?
A: If a transit agency believes it may receive the authority to provide the service free of charge, with no third party subsidy, then it should send out a new e-mail notice stating that it intends to provide the service free of charge.
(48) Q: What happens if a registered charter provider initially indicates interest in providing the service described in a notice, but then later is unable to perform the service?
A: If the registered charter provider acts in good faith by providing reasonable notice to the transit agency of its changed circumstances, and that registered charter provider was the only one to respond to the notice, then the transit agency may step back in and provide the service.
(49) Q: What happens if a registered charter provider indicates interest in providing the service, but then does not contact the customer?
A: A transit agency may step back in and provide the service if the registered charter provider was the only one to respond affirmatively to the notice.
(50) Q: What happens if a registered charter provider indicates interest in providing the service, contacts the customer, and then fails to provide a price quote to the customer?
A: If the requested service is 14 days or less away, a transit agency may step back in and provide the service if the registered charter provider was the only one to respond affirmatively to the notice upon filing a complaint with FTA to remove the registered charter provider from the FTA Charter Registration Web site. If the complaint of bad faith negotiations is not sustained by FTA, the transit agency may face a penalty, as determined by FTA. If the requested service is more than 14 days away, and the transit agency desires to step back in, then upon filing a complaint alleging bad faith negotiations that is sustained by FTA, the transit agency may step back in.
(51) Q: What happens if a transit agency entered into a contract to perform charter service before the effective date of the final rule?
A: If the service described in the contract occurs after the effective date of the final rule, the service must be in conformance with the new charter regulation.
(52) Q: What if the service described in the notice requires the use of park and ride lots owned by the transit agency?
A: If the transit agency received Federal funds for those park and ride lots, then the transit agency should allow a registered charter provider to use those lots upon a showing of an acceptable incidental use (the transit agency retains satisfactory continuing control over the park and ride lot and the use does not interfere with the provision of public transportation) and if the registered charter provider signs an appropriate use and indemnification agreement.
(53) Q: What if the registered charter provider does not provide quality charter service to the customer?
A: If a registered charter provider does not provide service to the satisfaction of the customer, the customer may pursue a civil action against the registered charter provider in a court of law. If the registered charter provider also demonstrated bad faith or fraud, it can be removed from the FTA Charter Registration Web site.
(e) Complaint & Investigation Process
(54) Q: May a trade association or other operators that are unable to provide requested charter service have the right to file a complaint against the transit agency?
A: Yes. A registered charter operator or its duly authorized representative, which can include a trade association, may file a complaint under section 604.26(a). Under the new rule, a private charter operator that is not registered with FTA's charter registration Web site may not file a complaint.
(55) Q: Is there a time limit for making complaints?
A: Yes. Complaints must be filed within 90 days of the alleged unauthorized charter service.
(56) Q: Are there examples of the likely remedies FTA may impose for a violation of the charter service regulations?
A: Yes. Appendix D contains a matrix of likely remedies that FTA may impose for a violation of the charter service regulations.
(57) Q: When a complaint is filed, who is responsible for arbitration or litigation costs?
A: FTA will pay for the presiding official and the facility for the hearing, if necessary. Each party involved in the litigation is responsible for its own litigation costs.
(58) Q: What affirmative defenses might be available in the complaint process?
A: An affirmative defense to a complaint could state the applicability of one of the exceptions such as 49 CFR Section 604.6, which states that the service that was provided was within the allowable 80 hours of government official service.
(59) Q: What can a transit agency do if it believes that a registered charter provider is not bargaining in good faith with a customer?
A: If a transit agency believes that a registered charter provider is not bargaining in good faith with the customer, the transit agency may file a complaint to remove the registered charter provider from FTA's Charter Registration Web site.
(60) Q: Does a registered charter provider have to charge the same fare or rate as a public transit agency?
A: No. A registered charter provider is not under an obligation to charge the same fare or rate as public transit agency. A registered charter provider, however, must charge commercially reasonable rates.
(61) Q: What actions can a private charter operator take when it becomes aware of a transit agency's plan to engage in charter service just before the date of the charter?
A: As soon as a registered charter provider becomes aware of an upcoming charter event that it was not contacted about, then it should request an advisory opinion and cease and desist order. If the service has already occurred, then the registered charter provider may file a complaint.
(62) Q: When a registered charter provider indicates that there are no privately owned vehicles available for lease, must the public transit agency investigate independently whether the representation by the registered charter provider is accurate?
A: No. The public transit agency is not required to investigate independently whether the registered charter provider's representation is accurate unless there is reason to suspect that the registered charter provider is committing fraud. Rather, the public transit agency need only confirm that the number of vehicles owned by all registered charter providers in the geographic service area is consistent with the registered charter provider's representation.
(63) Q: How will FTA determine the remedy for a violation of the charter regulations?
A: Remedies will be based upon the facts of the situation, including but not limited to, the extent of deviation from the regulations and the economic benefit from providing the charter service. See section 604.47 and Appendix D for more details.
(64) Q: Can multiple violations in a single finding stemming from a single complaint constitute a pattern of violations?
A: Yes. A pattern of violations is defined as more than one finding of unauthorized charter service under this part by FTA beginning with the most recent finding of unauthorized charter service and looking back over a period not to exceed 72 months. While a single complaint may contain several allegations, the complaint must allege more than a single event that included unauthorized charter service in order to establish a pattern of violations.
(f) Miscellaneous
(65) Q: If a grantee operates assets that are locally funded are such assets subject to the charter regulations?
A: It depends. If a recipient receives FTA funds for operating assistance or stores its vehicles in a FTA-funded facility or receives indirect FTA assistance, then the charter regulations apply. The fact that the vehicle was locally funded does not make the recipient exempt from the charter regulations. If both operating and capital funds are locally supplied, then the vehicle is not subject to the charter service regulations.
(66) Q: What can a public transit agency do if there is a time sensitive event, such as a presidential inauguration, for which the transit agency does not have time to consult with all the private charter operators in its area?
A: 49 Section 604.11 provides a process to petition the FTA Administrator for permission to provide service for a unique and time sensitive event. A presidential inauguration, however, is not a good example of a unique and time sensitive event. A presidential inauguration is an event with substantial advance planning and a transit agency should have time to contact private operators. If the inauguration also includes ancillary events, the public transit agency should refer the customer to the registration list.
(67) Q: Are body-on-van-chassis vehicles classified as buses or vans under the charter regulation?
A: Body-on-van-chassis vehicles are treated as vans under the charter regulation.
(68) Q: When a new operator registers, may recipients continue under existing contractual agreements for charter service?
A: Yes. If the contract was signed before the new private operator registered, the arrangement can continue for up to 90 days. During that 90 day period, however, the public transit agency must enter into an agreement with the new registrant. If not, the transit agency must terminate the existing agreement for all registered charter providers.
(69) Q: Must a public transit agency continue to serve as the lead for events of regional or national significance, if after consultation with all registered charter providers, registered charter providers have enough vehicles to provide all of the service to the event?
A. No. If after consultation with registered charter providers, there is no need for the public transit vehicles, then the public transit agency may decline to serve as the lead and allow the registered charter providers to work directly with event organizers. Alternatively, the public transit entity may retain the lead and continue to coordinate with event organizers and registered charter providers.
(70) Q: What happens if a customer specifically requests a trolley from a transit agency and there are no registered charter providers that have a trolley?
A: FTA views trolleys as buses. Thus, all the privately owned buses must be engaged in service and unavailable before a transit agency may lease its trolley. Alternatively, the transit agency could enter into an agreement with all registered charter providers in its geographic service area to allow it to provide trolley charter services.
(71) Q: How does a transit agency enter into an agreement with all registered charter providers in its geographic service area?
A: A public transit agency should send an email notice to all registered charter providers of its intent to provide charter service. A registered charter provider must respond to the email notice either affirmatively or negatively. The transit agency should also indicate in the email notification that failure to respond to the email notice results in concurrence with the notification.
(72) Q: Can a registered charter provider rescind its affirmative response to an email notification?
A: Yes. If after further consideration or a change in circumstances for the registered charter provider, a registered charter provider may notify the customer and the transit agency that it is no longer interested in providing the requested charter service. At that point, the transit agency may make the decision to step back in to provide the service.
(73) Q: What happens after a registered charter provider submits a quote for charter services to a customer? Does the transit agency have to review the quote?
A: Once a registered charter provider responds affirmatively to an email notification and provides the customer a commercially reasonable quote, then the transit agency may not step back in to perform the service. A transit agency is not responsible for reviewing the quote submitted by a registered charter provider. FTA recommends that a registered charter provider include in the quote an expiration date for the offer.
Appendix D to Part 604 - Table of Potential Remedies
Remedy Assessment Matrix:
FTA's Remedy Policy
 -  This remedy policy applies to decisions by the Chief Counsel, Presiding Officials, and final determinations by the Administrator.
 -  Remedy calculation is based on the following elements:
(1) The nature and circumstances of the violation;
(2) The extent and gravity of the violation (extent of deviation from regulatory requirements);
(3) The revenue earned (economic benefit) by providing the charter service;
(4) The operating budget of the recipient;
(5) Such other matters as justice may require; and
(6) Whether a recipient provided service described in a cease and desist order after issuance of such order by the Chief Counsel.

PART 630 - NATIONAL TRANSIT DATABASE
 Authority:49 U.S.C. 5335.
Source:72 FR 68761, Dec. 6, 2007, unless otherwise noted.
 630.1   Purpose.
The purpose of this part is to prescribe requirements and procedures necessary for compliance with the National Transit Database Reporting System and Uniform System of Accounts, as mandated by 49 U.S.C. 5335, and to set forth the procedures for addressing a reporting entity's failure to comply with these requirements.
 630.2   Scope.
This part applies to all applicants for, and any person that receives benefits directly from, a grant under 49 U.S.C. 5307 or 5311.
 630.3   Definitions.
(a) Except as otherwise provided, terms defined in 49 U.S.C. 5302 et seq. apply to this part.
(b) Except as otherwise provided, terms defined in the current editions of the National Transit Database Reporting Manuals and the NTD Uniform System of Accounts are used in this part as so defined.
(c) For purposes of this part:
Administrator means the Federal Transit Administrator or the Administrator's designee.
Applicant means an entity seeking Federal financial assistance under 49 U.S.C. chapter 53.
Assistance means Federal financial assistance for the planning, acquisition, construction, or operation of public transportation services.
Beneficiary means any entity that receives benefits from assistance under 49 U.S.C. 5307 or 5311.
Current edition of the National Transit Database Reporting Manuals and Uniform System of Accounts means the most recently issued editions of the reference documents.
Days mean calendar days.
Reference Document(s) means the current editions of the National Transit Database Reporting Manuals and Uniform System of Accounts. These documents are subject to periodic revision. Beneficiaries and applicants are responsible for using the current editions of the reference documents.
Reporting entity means an entity required to provide reports as set forth in the reference documents.
State Department of Transportation means the Department of Transportation of a State of the United States, the District of Columbia, Puerto Rico, the Northern Mariana Islands, Guam, American Samoa, or the U.S. Virgin Islands.
Transit agency means an entity providing public transportation as defined in 49 U.S.C. 5302.
 630.4   Requirements.
(a) National Transit Database Reporting System. Each applicant for and beneficiary of Federal financial assistance under 49 U.S.C. chapter 53 must comply with the applicable requirements of 49 U.S.C. 5335, as set forth in the reference documents.
(b) Copies. Copies of reference documents are available from the National Transit Database Web site located at  These reference documents are subject to periodic revision. Revisions of reference documents will be posted on the National Transit Database Web site and a notice of any significant changes to the reporting requirements specified in these reference documents will be published in the Federal Register.
 630.5   Failure to report data.
Failure to report data in accordance with this part may result in the noncompliant reporting entity being ineligible to receive any funding under 49 U.S.C. chapter 53, directly or indirectly, until such time as a report is filed in accordance with this part.
 630.6   Late and incomplete reports.
(a) Late reports. Each reporting entity shall ensure that FTA receives its report by the due dates prescribed in the reference documents. A reporting entity may request a 30 day extension to submit its report. FTA will treat a failure to submit the required report by the due date or the extension date as failure to report data under  630.5.
(b) Incomplete reports. FTA will treat an NTD submission that does not contain all of the required data; or does not contain the required certifications, where applicable; or that is not in substantial conformance with the definitions, procedures, and format requirements set out in the reference documents as a failure to report data under  630.5, unless the reporting entity has exhausted all possibilities for obtaining this information.
 630.7   Failure to respond to questions.
FTA will review each NTD submission to verify the reasonableness of the data submitted. If any of the data do not appear reasonable, FTA will notify the reporting entity of this fact in writing, and request written justification from the reporting entity to either document the accuracy of the questioned data, or to revise the questioned data with a more accurate submission. Failure of a reporting entity to make a good-faith written response to this request will be treated as a failure to report data under  630.5.
 630.8   Questionable data items.
FTA may enter a zero, or adjust any questionable data item(s), in any reporting entity's NTD submission that is used in computing the Section 5307 apportionment. These adjustments may be made if any data appears to be inaccurate, have not been collected and reported in accordance with FTA reference documents, or if there is not adequate documentation and a reliable recordkeeping system.
 630.9   Notice of FTA action.
Before taking final action under  630.5 or 630.8, FTA will transmit a written request to the reporting entity to provide the necessary information within a specified reasonable period of time. FTA will advise the reporting entity of its final decision.
 630.10   Waiver of reporting requirements.
Waivers of one or more sections of the reporting requirements may be granted at the discretion of the Administrator on a written showing that the party seeking the waiver cannot furnish the required data without unreasonable expense and inconvenience. Each waiver will be for a specified period of time.
 630.11   Data adjustments.
Errors in the data used in making the Section 5307 apportionment may be discovered after any particular year's apportionment is completed. If so, FTA shall make adjustments to correct these errors in a subsequent year's apportionment to the extent feasible.
PART 625 - TRANSIT ASSET MANAGEMENT
Authority:Sec. 20019 of Pub. L. 112-141, 126 Stat. 707, 49 U.S.C. 5326; Sec. 20025(a) of Pub. L. 112-141, 126 Stat, 718, 49 CFR 1.91.
Source:81 FR 48962, July 26, 2016, unless otherwise noted.
Subpart A - General Provisions
 625.1   Purpose.
This part carries out the mandate of 49 U.S.C. 5326 for transit asset management. This part establishes a National Transit Asset Management (TAM) System to monitor and manage public transportation capital assets to enhance safety, reduce maintenance costs, increase reliability, and improve performance.
 625.3   Applicability.
This part applies to all recipients and subrecipients of Federal financial assistance under 49 U.S.C. Chapter 53 that own, operate, or manage capital assets used for providing public transportation.
 625.5   Definitions.
All terms defined in 49 U.S.C. Chapter 53 are incorporated into this part by reference. The following terms also apply to this part:
Accountable Executive means a single, identifiable person who has ultimate responsibility for carrying out the safety management system of a public transportation agency; responsibility for carrying out transit asset management practices; and control or direction over the human and capital resources needed to develop and maintain both the agency's public transportation agency safety plan, in accordance with 49 U.S.C. 5329(d), and the agency's transit asset management plan in accordance with 49 U.S.C. 5326.
Asset category means a grouping of asset classes, including a grouping of equipment, a grouping of rolling stock, a grouping of infrastructure, and a grouping of facilities. See Appendix A to this part.
Asset class means a subgroup of capital assets within an asset category. For example, buses, trolleys, and cutaway vans are all asset classes within the rolling stock asset category. See Appendix A to this part.
Asset inventory means a register of capital assets, and information about those assets.
Capital asset means a unit of rolling stock, a facility, a unit of equipment, or an element of infrastructure used for providing public transportation.
Decision support tool means an analytic process or methodology:
(1) To help prioritize projects to improve and maintain the state of good repair of capital assets within a public transportation system, based on available condition data and objective criteria; or
(2) To assess financial needs for asset investments over time.
Direct recipient means an entity that receives Federal financial assistance directly from the Federal Transit Administration.
Equipment means an article of nonexpendable, tangible property having a useful life of at least one year.
Exclusive-use maintenance facility means a maintenance facility that is not commercial and either owned by a transit provider or used for servicing their vehicles.
Facility means a building or structure that is used in providing public transportation.
Full level of performance means the objective standard established by FTA for determining whether a capital asset is in a state of good repair.
Group TAM plan means a single TAM plan that is developed by a sponsor on behalf of at least one tier II provider.
Horizon period means the fixed period of time within which a transit provider will evaluate the performance of its TAM plan.
Implementation strategy means a transit provider's approach to carrying out TAM practices, including establishing a schedule, accountabilities, tasks, dependencies, and roles and responsibilities.
Infrastructure means the underlying framework or structures that support a public transportation system.
Investment prioritization means a transit provider's ranking of capital projects or programs to achieve or maintain a state of good repair. An investment prioritization is based on financial resources from all sources that a transit provider reasonably anticipates will be available over the TAM plan horizon period.
Key asset management activities means a list of activities that a transit provider determines are critical to achieving its TAM goals.
Life-cycle cost means the cost of managing an asset over its whole life.
Participant means a tier II provider that participates in a group TAM plan.
Performance Measure means an expression based on a quantifiable indicator of performance or condition that is used to establish targets and to assess progress toward meeting the established targets (e.g., a measure for on-time performance is the percent of trains that arrive on time, and a corresponding quantifiable indicator of performance or condition is an arithmetic difference between scheduled and actual arrival time for each train).
Performance target means a quantifiable level of performance or condition, expressed as a value for the measure, to be achieved within a time period required by the Federal Transit Administration (FTA).
Public transportation system means the entirety of a transit provider's operations, including the services provided through contractors.
Public transportation agency safety plan means a transit provider's documented comprehensive agency safety plan that is required by 49 U.S.C. 5329.
Recipient means an entity that receives Federal financial assistance under 49 U.S.C. Chapter 53, either directly from FTA or as a subrecipient.
Rolling stock means a revenue vehicle used in providing public transportation, including vehicles used for carrying passengers on fare-free services.
Service vehicle means a unit of equipment that is used primarily either to support maintenance and repair work for a public transportation system or for delivery of materials, equipment, or tools.
Sponsor means a State, a designated recipient, or a direct recipient that develops a group TAM for at least one tier II provider.
State of good repair (SGR) means the condition in which a capital asset is able to operate at a full level of performance.
Subrecipient means an entity that receives Federal transit grant funds indirectly through a State or a direct recipient.
TERM scale means the five (5) category rating system used in the Federal Transit Administration's Transit Economic Requirements Model (TERM) to describe the condition of an asset: 5.0 - Excellent, 4.0 - Good; 3.0 - Adequate, 2.0 - Marginal, and 1.0 - Poor.
Tier I provider means a recipient that owns, operates, or manages either (1) one hundred and one (101) or more vehicles in revenue service during peak regular service across all fixed route modes or in any one non-fixed route mode, or (2) rail transit.
Tier II provider means a recipient that owns, operates, or manages (1) one hundred (100) or fewer vehicles in revenue service during peak regular service across all non-rail fixed route modes or in any one non-fixed route mode, (2) a subrecipient under the 5311 Rural Area Formula Program, (3) or any American Indian tribe.
Transit asset management (TAM) means the strategic and systematic practice of procuring, operating, inspecting, maintaining, rehabilitating, and replacing transit capital assets to manage their performance, risks, and costs over their life cycles, for the purpose of providing safe, cost-effective, and reliable public transportation.
Transit asset management (TAM) plan means a plan that includes an inventory of capital assets, a condition assessment of inventoried assets, a decision support tool, and a prioritization of investments.
Transit asset management (TAM) policy means a transit provider's documented commitment to achieving and maintaining a state of good repair for all of its capital assets. The TAM policy defines the transit provider's TAM objectives and defines and assigns roles and responsibilities for meeting those objectives.
Transit asset management (TAM) strategy means the approach a transit provider takes to carry out its policy for TAM, including its objectives and performance targets.
Transit asset management system means a strategic and systematic process of operating, maintaining, and improving public transportation capital assets effectively, throughout the life cycles of those assets.
Transit provider (provider) means a recipient or subrecipient of Federal financial assistance under 49 U.S.C. chapter 53 that owns, operates, or manages capital assets used in providing public transportation.
Useful life means either the expected life cycle of a capital asset or the acceptable period of use in service determined by FTA.
Useful life benchmark (ULB) means the expected life cycle or the acceptable period of use in service for a capital asset, as determined by a transit provider, or the default benchmark provided by FTA.
Subpart B - National Transit Asset Management System
 625.15   Elements of the National Transit Asset Management System.
The National TAM System includes the following elements:
(a) The definition of state of good repair, which includes objective standards for measuring the condition of capital assets, in accordance with subpart D of this part;
(b) Performance measures for capital assets and a requirement that a provider and a group TAM plan sponsor establish performance targets for improving the condition of capital assets, in accordance with subpart D of this part;
(c) A requirement that a provider develop and carry out a TAM plan, in accordance with subpart C of this part,
(d) Reporting requirements in accordance with subpart E of this part; and
(e) Analytical processes and decision support tools developed or recommended by FTA.
 625.17   State of good repair principles.
(a) A capital asset is in a state of good repair if it is in a condition sufficient for the asset to operate at a full level of performance. In determining whether a capital asset is in a state of good repair, a provider must consider the state of good repair standards under subpart D of this part.
(b) An individual capital asset may operate at a full level of performance regardless of whether or not other capital assets within a public transportation system are in a state of good repair.
(c) A provider's Accountable Executive must balance transit asset management, safety, day-to-day operations, and expansion needs in approving and carrying out a TAM plan and a public transportation agency safety plan.
Subpart C - Transit Asset Management Plans
 625.25   Transit Asset Management Plan requirements.
(a) General. (1) Each tier I provider must develop and carry out a TAM plan that includes each element under paragraph (b) of this section.
(2) Each tier II provider must develop its own TAM plan or participate in a group TAM plan. A tier II provider's TAM plan and a group TAM plan only must include elements under paragraphs (b)(1) through (4) of this section.
(3) A provider's Accountable Executive is ultimately responsible for ensuring that a TAM plan is developed and carried out in accordance with this part.
(b) Transit asset management plan elements. Except as provided in paragraph (a)(3) of this section, a TAM plan must include the following elements:
(1) An inventory of the number and type of capital assets. The inventory must include all capital assets that a provider owns, except equipment with an acquisition value under $50,000 that is not a service vehicle. An inventory also must include third-party owned or jointly procured exclusive-use maintenance facilities, passenger station facilities, administrative facilities, rolling stock, and guideway infrastructure used by a provider in the provision of public transportation. The asset inventory must be organized at a level of detail commensurate with the level of detail in the provider's program of capital projects;
(2) A condition assessment of those inventoried assets for which a provider has direct capital responsibility. A condition assessment must generate information in a level of detail sufficient to monitor and predict the performance of the assets and to inform the investment prioritization;
(3) A description of analytical processes or decision-support tools that a provider uses to estimate capital investment needs over time and develop its investment prioritization;
(4) A provider's project-based prioritization of investments, developed in accordance with  625.33 of this part;
(5) A provider's TAM and SGR policy;
(6) A provider's TAM plan implementation strategy;
(7) A description of key TAM activities that a provider intends to engage in over the TAM plan horizon period;
(8) A summary or list of the resources, including personnel, that a provider needs to develop and carry out the TAM plan; and
(9) An outline of how a provider will monitor, update, and evaluate, as needed, its TAM plan and related business practices, to ensure the continuous improvement of its TAM practices.
 625.27   Group plans for transit asset management.
(a) Responsibilities of a group TAM plan sponsor. (1) A sponsor must develop a group TAM plan for its tier II provider subrecipients, except those subrecipients that are also direct recipients under the 49 U.S.C. 5307 Urbanized Area Formula Grant Program. The group TAM plan must include a list of those subrecipients that are participating in the plan.
(2) A sponsor must comply with the requirements of this part for a TAM plan when developing a group TAM plan.
(3) A sponsor must coordinate the development of a group TAM plan with each participant's Accountable Executive.
(4) A sponsor must make the completed group TAM plan available to all participants in a format that is easily accessible.
(b) Responsibilities of a group TAM plan participant. (1) A tier II provider may participate in only one group TAM plan.
(2) A tier II provider must provide written notification to a sponsor if it chooses to opt-out of a group TAM plan. A provider that opts-out of a group TAM plan must either develop its own TAM plan or participate in another sponsor's group TAM plan.
(3) A participant must provide a sponsor with any information that is necessary and relevant to the development of a group TAM plan.
 625.29   Transit asset management plan: horizon period, amendments, and updates.
(a) Horizon period. A TAM plan must cover a horizon period of at least four (4) years.
(b) Amendments. A provider may update its TAM plan at any time during the TAM plan horizon period. A provider should amend its TAM plan whenever there is a significant change to the asset inventory, condition assessments, or investment prioritization that the provider did not reasonably anticipate during the development of the TAM plan.
(c) Updates. A provider must update its entire TAM plan at least once every four (4) years. A provider's TAM plan update should coincide with the planning cycle for the relevant Transportation Improvement Program or Statewide Transportation Improvement Program.
 625.31   Implementation deadline.
(a) A provider's initial TAM plan must be completed no later than two years after October 1, 2016.
(b) A provider may submit in writing to FTA a request to extend the implementation deadline. FTA must receive an extension request before the implementation deadline and will consider all requests on a case-by-case basis.
 625.33   Investment prioritization.
(a) A TAM plan must include an investment prioritization that identifies a provider's programs and projects to improve or manage over the TAM plan horizon period the state of good repair of capital assets for which the provider has direct capital responsibility.
(b) A provider must rank projects to improve or manage the state of good repair of capital assets in order of priority and anticipated project year.
(c) A provider's project rankings must be consistent with its TAM policy and strategies.
(d) When developing an investment prioritization, a provider must give due consideration to those state of good repair projects to improve that pose an identified unacceptable safety risk when developing its investment prioritization.
(e) When developing an investment prioritization, a provider must take into consideration its estimation of funding levels from all available sources that it reasonably expects will be available in each fiscal year during the TAM plan horizon period.
(f) When developing its investment prioritization, a provider must take into consideration requirements under 49 CFR 37.161 and 37.163 concerning maintenance of accessible features and the requirements under 49 CFR 37.43 concerning alteration of transportation facilities.
Subpart D - Performance Management
 625.41   Standards for measuring the condition of capital assets.
A capital asset is in a state of good repair if it meets the following objective standards - 
(a) The capital asset is able to perform its designed function;
(b) The use of the asset in its current condition does not pose an identified unacceptable safety risk; and
(c) The life-cycle investment needs of the asset have been met or recovered, including all scheduled maintenance, rehabilitation, and replacements.
 625.43   SGR performance measures for capital assets.
(a) Equipment: (non-revenue) service vehicles. The performance measure for non-revenue, support-service and maintenance vehicles equipment is the percentage of those vehicles that have either met or exceeded their ULB.
(b) Rolling stock. The performance measure for rolling stock is the percentage of revenue vehicles within a particular asset class that have either met or exceeded their ULB.
(c) Infrastructure: rail fixed-guideway, track, signals, and systems. The performance measure for rail fixed-guideway, track, signals, and systems is the percentage of track segments with performance restrictions.
(d) Facilities. The performance measure for facilities is the percentage of facilities within an asset class, rated below condition 3 on the TERM scale.
 625.45   Setting performance targets for capital assets.
(a) General. (1) A provider must set one or more performance targets for each applicable performance measure.
(2) A provider must set a performance target based on realistic expectations, and both the most recent data available and the financial resources from all sources that the provider reasonably expects will be available during the TAM plan horizon period.
(b) Timeline for target setting. (1) Within three months after the effective date of this part, a provider must set performance targets for the following fiscal year for each asset class included in its TAM plan.
(2) At least once every fiscal year after initial targets are set, a provider must set performance targets for the following fiscal year.
(c) Role of the accountable executive. A provider's Accountable Executive must approve each annual performance target.
(d) Setting performance targets for group plan participants. (1) A Sponsor must set one or more unified performance targets for each asset class reflected in the group TAM plan in accordance with paragraphs (a)(2) and (b) of this section.
(2) To the extent practicable, a Sponsor must coordinate its unified performance targets with each participant's Accountable Executive.
(e) Coordination with metropolitan, statewide and non-metropolitan planning processes. To the maximum extent practicable, a provider and Sponsor must coordinate with States and Metropolitan Planning Organizations in the selection of State and Metropolitan Planning Organization performance targets.
Subpart E - Recordkeeping and Reporting Requirements for Transit Asset Management
 625.53   Recordkeeping for transit asset management.
(a) At all times, each provider must maintain records and documents that support, and set forth in full, its TAM plan.
(b) A provider must make its TAM plan, any supporting records or documents performance targets, investment strategies, and the annual condition assessment report available to a State and Metropolitan Planning Organization that provides funding to the provider to aid in the planning process.
 625.55   Annual reporting for transit asset management.
(a) Each provider must submit the following reports:
(1) An annual data report to FTA's National Transit Database that reflects the SGR performance targets for the following year and condition information for the provider's public transportation system.
(2) An annual narrative report to the National Transit Database that provides a description of any change in the condition of the provider's transit system from the previous year and describes the progress made during the year to meet the performance targets set in the previous reporting year.
(b) A Sponsor must submit one consolidated annual data report and one consolidated annual narrative report, as described in paragraph (a)(1) and (2) of this section, to the National Transit Database on behalf of its participants.
 
Appendix A to Part 625 - Asset Categories, Asset Classes, and Individual Assets
EXAMPLE of asset categories, asset classes, and individual assets:
Appendix B to Part 625 - Relationship Amongst SGR Performance Measures, SGR Definition, and SGR Principles
EXAMPLE Relationship amongst SGR performance measures, SGR definition, and SGR principles:
(a) A tier I provider has a TAM asset inventory containing, in total across all modes, over 150 revenue vehicles in peak revenue service, no rail fixed guideway, multiple passenger and exclusive use maintenance facilities, and various pieces of equipment over $50,000. Their asset inventory is itemized at the level of detail they use in their capital program of projects; it also includes capital assets they do not own but use. The provider conducts condition assessments on those assets in its inventory for which it has direct financial responsibility. The results of the condition assessment indicate that there is an identified unacceptable safety risk in the deteriorated condition of one of their non-revenue service vehicles, but that the non-revenue service vehicles are being used as designed. The condition assessment results show the provider that one non-revenue service vehicle is not in SGR.
(b) The condition assessment results also inform the investment prioritization process, which for this provider is a regression analysis in a spreadsheet software program. The provider's criteria, as well as their weightings, are locally determined to produce the ranked list of programs and projects in their investment prioritization. The provider batches its projects by low, medium or high priority, identifying in which funding year each project will proceed. The provider has elected to use the ULB defaults, provided by FTA, for each of their modes until such time as they have resources and expertise to develop customized ULBs.
(c) The provider separates assets within each asset category by class to determine their current performance measure metric. For example, the equipment listed in its TAM asset inventory includes HVAC equipment and service vehicles; however, the SGR performance metric for the equipment category only requires the non-revenue vehicle metrics. Thus, the provider measures only non-revenue vehicles that exceed the default ULB for the modes they own, operate, or manage. This metric is the baseline the provider uses to determine its target for the forthcoming year.
(d) The provider's equipment baseline, its investment priorities that show minimal funding for non-revenue vehicles over the next 4 years, and its TAM policies, strategies and key asset management activities are used to project its target for the equipment category. Since one of its non-revenue service vehicles indicated an unacceptable safety risk, it is elevated in the investment prioritization for maintenance or replacement. The provider's target may indicate a decline in the condition of their equipment overall, but it addresses the unacceptable safety risk as an immediate priority.
(e) The cyclic nature of investment prioritization and SGR performance target setting requires the provider to go through the process more than once to settle on the balance of priorities and targets that best reflects its local needs and funding availability from all sources. The provider's accountable executive has ultimate responsibility for accepting and approving the TAM plan and SGR targets. The targets are then submit to the NTD and shared with the provider's planning organization. The narrative report, which describes the SGR performance measure metrics, is also submitted to the NTD.
Appendix C to Part 625 - Assets Included in National TAM System Provisions
Table 1 - Assets Included in National TAM System Provisions
Table 2 - EXAMPLE of Multiple SGR Performance Targets for a Sample Fleet
PART 640 - CREDIT ASSISTANCE FOR SURFACE TRANSPORTATION PROJECTS
Authority:Secs. 1501 et seq., Pub. L. 105-178, 112 Stat. 107, 241, as amended; 23 U.S.C. 181-189 and 315; 49 CFR 1.51.
 640.1   Cross-reference to credit assistance.
The regulations in 49 CFR part 80 shall be followed in complying with the requirements of this part. Title 49, CFR, part 80 implements the Transportation Infrastructure Finance and Innovation Act of 1998, secs. 1501 et seq., Pub. L. 105-178, 112 Stat. 107, 241.

PART 661 - BUY AMERICA REQUIREMENTS
Authority:49 U.S.C. 5323(j) (formerly sec. 165 of the Surface Transportation Assistance Act of 1982 (Pub. L. 97-424); as amended by sec. 337, Pub. L. 100-17; sec. 1048, Pub. L. 102-240; sec. 3020(b), Pub. L. 105-178; and sec. 3023(i) and (k), Pub. L. 109-59); 49 CFR 1.51.
Source:56 FR 932, Jan. 9, 1991, unless otherwise noted.
 661.1   Applicability.
Unless otherwise noted, this part applies to all federally assisted procurements using funds authorized by 49 U.S.C. 5323(j); 23 U.S.C. 103(e)(4); and section 14 of the National Capital Transportation Act of 1969, as amended.
 661.3   Definitions.
As used in this part:
Act means the Federal Public Transportation Law (49 U.S.C. Chapter 53).
Administrator means the Administrator of FTA, or designee.
Component means any article, material, or supply, whether manufactured or unmanufactured, that is directly incorporated into the end product at the final assembly location.
Contractor means a party to a third party contract other than the grantee.
End product means any vehicle, structure, product, article, material, supply, or system, which directly incorporates constituent components at the final assembly location, that is acquired for public use under a federally-funded third-party contract, and which is ready to provide its intended end function or use without any further manufacturing or assembly change(s). A list of representative end products is included at Appendix A to this section.
FTA means the Federal Transit Administration.
Grantee means any entity that is a recipient of FTA funds.
Manufactured product means an item produced as a result of the manufacturing process.
Manufacturing process means the application of processes to alter the form or function of materials or of elements of the product in a manner adding value and transforming those materials or elements so that they represent a new end product functionally different from that which would result from mere assembly of the elements or materials.
Negotiated procurement means a contract awarded using other than sealed bidding procedures.
Rolling stock means transit vehicles such as buses, vans, cars, railcars, locomotives, trolley cars and buses, and ferry boats, as well as vehicles used for support services.
System means a machine, product, or device, or a combination of such equipment, consisting of individual components, whether separate or interconnected by piping, transmission devices, electrical cables or circuitry, or by other devices, which are intended to contribute together to a clearly defined function. Factors to consider in determining whether a system constitutes an end product include: Whether performance warranties apply to an integrated system (regardless of whether components are separately warranteed); whether products perform on an integrated basis with other products in a system, or are operated independently of associated products in the system; or whether transit agencies routinely procure a product separately (other than as replacement or spare parts).
United States means the several States, the Commonwealth of Puerto Rico, the District of Columbia, Guam, American Samoa, the U.S. Virgin Islands, and the Commonwealth of the Northern Mariana Islands.
Appendix A to  661.3 - End Products
The following is a list of representative end products that are subject to the requirements of Buy America. This list is representative, not exhaustive.
(1) Rolling stock end products: All individual items identified as rolling stock in  661.3 (e.g., buses, vans, cars, railcars, locomotives, trolley cars and buses, ferry boats, as well as vehicles used for support services); train control, communication, and traction power equipment that meets the definition of end product at  661.3 (e.g., a communication or traction power system, including manufactured bimetallic power rail).
(2) Steel and iron end products: Items made primarily of steel or iron such as structures, bridges, and track work, including running rail, contact rail, and turnouts.
(3) Manufactured end products: Infrastructure projects not made primarily of steel or iron, including structures (terminals, depots, garages, and bus shelters), ties and ballast; contact rail not made primarily of steel or iron; fare collection systems; computers; information systems; security systems; data processing systems; and mobile lifts, hoists, and elevators.
 661.5   General requirements.
(a) Except as provided in  661.7 and  661.11 of this part, no funds may be obligated by FTA for a grantee project unless all iron, steel, and manufactured products used in the project are produced in the United States.
(b) All steel and iron manufacturing processes must take place in the United States, except metallurgical processes involving refinement of steel additives.
(c) The steel and iron requirements apply to all construction materials made primarily of steel or iron and used in infrastructure projects such as transit or maintenance facilities, rail lines, and bridges. These items include, but are not limited to, structural steel or iron, steel or iron beams and columns, running rail and contact rail. These requirements do not apply to steel or iron used as components or subcomponents of other manufactured products or rolling stock, or to bimetallic power rail incorporating steel or iron components.
(d) For a manufactured product to be considered produced in the United States:
(1) All of the manufacturing processes for the product must take place in the United States; and
(2) All of the components of the product must be of U.S. origin. A component is considered of U.S. origin if it is manufactured in the United States, regardless of the origin of its subcomponents.
 661.6   Certification requirements for procurement of steel or manufactured products.
If steel, iron, or manufactured products (as defined in  661.3 and 661.5 of this part) are being procured, the appropriate certificate as set forth below shall be completed and submitted by each bidder or offeror in accordance with the requirement contained in  661.13(b) of this part.
Certificate of Compliance with Buy America Requirements
The bidder or offeror hereby certifies that it will comply with the requirements of 49 U.S.C. 5323(j)(1), and the applicable regulations in 49 CFR part 661.
Date 
Signature 
Company
Name 
Title
Certificate of Non-Compliance with Buy America Requirements
The bidder or offeror hereby certifies that it cannot comply with the requirements of 49 U.S.C. 5323(j), but it may qualify for an exception to the requirement pursuant to 49 U.S.C. 5323(j)(2), as amended, and the applicable regulations in 49 CFR 661.7.
Date 
Signature 
Company
Name 
Title
 661.7   Waivers.
(a) Section 5323(j)(2) of Title 49 United States Code provides that the general requirements of 49 U.S.C. 5323(j)(1) shall not apply in four specific instances. This section sets out the conditions for the three statutory waivers based on public interest, non-availability, and price-differential. Section 661.11 of this part sets out the conditions for the fourth statutory waiver governing the procurement of rolling stock and associated equipment.
(b) Under the provision of 49 U.S.C. 5323(j)(2)(A), the Administrator may waive the general requirements of 49 U.S.C. 5323(j)(1) if the Administrator finds that their application would be inconsistent with the public interest. In determining whether the conditions exist to grant this public interest waiver, the Administrator will consider all appropriate factors on a case-by-case basis, unless a general exception is specifically set out in this part. When granting a public interest waiver, the Administrator shall issue a detailed written statement justifying why the waiver is in the public interest. The Administrator shall publish this justification in the Federal Register, providing the public with a reasonable time for notice and comment of not more than seven calendar days.
(c) Under the provision of 49 U.S.C. 5323(j)(2), the Administrator may waive the general requirements of 49 U.S.C. 5323(j) if the Administrator finds that the materials for which a waiver is requested are not produced in the United States in sufficient and reasonably available quantities and of a satisfactory quality.
(1) It will be presumed that the conditions exist to grant this non-availability waiver if no responsive and responsible bid is received offering an item produced in the United States.
(2) In the case of a sole source procurement, the Administrator will grant this non-availability waiver only if the grantee provides sufficient information which indicates that the item to be procured is only available from a single source or that the item to be procured is not produced in sufficient and reasonably available quantities of a satisfactory quality in the United States.
(3) After contract award, the Administrator may grant a non-availability waiver under this paragraph, in any case in which a bidder or offeror originally certified compliance with the Buy America requirements in good faith, but can no longer comply with its certification. The Administrator will grant a non-availability waiver only if the grantee provides sufficient evidence that the original certification was made in good faith and that the item to be procured cannot now be obtained domestically due to commercial impossibility or impracticability. In determining whether the conditions exist to grant a post-award non-availability waiver, the Administrator will consider all appropriate factors on a case-by-case basis.
(d) Under the provision of section 165(b)(4) of the Act, the Administrator may waive the general requirements of section 165(a) if the Administrator finds that the inclusion of a domestic item or domestic material will increase the cost of the contract between the grantee and its supplier of that item or material by more than 25 percent. The Administrator will grant this price-differential waiver if the amount of the lowest responsive and responsible bid offering the item or material that is not produced in the United States multiplied by 1.25 is less than the amount of the lowest responsive and responsible bid offering the item or material produced in the United States.
(e) The four statutory waivers of 49 U.S.C. 5323(j)(2) as set out in this part shall be treated as being separate and distinct from each other.
(f) The waivers described in paragraphs (b) and (c) of this section may be granted for a component or subcomponent in the case of the procurement of the items governed by 49 U.S.C. 5323(j)(2)(C) (requirements for rolling stock). If a waiver is granted for a component or a subcomponent, that component or subcomponent will be considered to be of domestic origin for the purposes of  661.11 of this part.
(g) The waivers described in paragraphs (b) and (c) of this section may be granted for a specific item or material that is used in the production of a manufactured product that is governed by the requirements of  661.5(d) of this part. If such a waiver is granted to such a specific item or material, that item or material will be treated as being of domestic origin.
(h) The provisions of this section shall not apply to products produced in a foreign country if the Secretary, in consultation with the United States Trade Representative, determines that:
(1) That foreign country is party to an agreement with the United States pursuant to which the head of an agency of the United States has waived the requirements of this section; and
(2) That foreign country has violated the terms of the agreement by discriminating against products covered by this section that are produced in the United States and are covered by the agreement.
Appendix A to  661.7 - General Waivers
(a) All waivers published in 48 CFR 25.104 which establish excepted articles, materials, and supplies for the Buy American Act of 1933 (41 U.S.C. 10a-d), as the waivers may be amended from time to time, apply to this part under the provisions of  661.7 (b) and (c).
(b) Under the provisions of  661.7 (b) and (c) of this part, a general public interest waiver from the Buy America requirements applies to microprocessors, computers, microcomputers, or software, or other such devices, which are used solely for the purpose of processing or storing data. This general waiver does not extend to a product or device which merely contains a microprocessor or microcomputer and is not used solely for the purpose of processing or storing data.
(c) Under the provisions of  661.7(b) of this part, a general public interest waiver from the Buy America requirements for small purchases (as defined in the common grant rule, at 49 CFR 18.36(d)) made by FTA grantees with capital, planning, or operating assistance.
 661.9   Application for waivers.
(a) This section sets out the application procedures for obtaining all waivers, except those general exceptions set forth in this part for which individual applications are unnecessary and those covered by 49 U.S.C. 5323(j)(2)(C). The procedures for obtaining an exception covered by 49 U.S.C. 5323(j)(2)(C) are set forth in  661.11 of this part.
(b) A bidder or offeror who seeks to establish grounds for an exception must seek the exception, in a timely manner, through the grantee.
(c) Except as provided in paragraph (d) of this section, only a grantee may request a waiver. The request must be in writing, include facts and justification to support the waiver, and be submitted to the Administrator through the appropriate Regional Office.
(d) FTA will consider a request for a waiver from a potential bidder, offeror, or supplier only if the waiver is being sought under  661.7 (f) or (g) of this part.
(e) The Administrator will issue a written determination setting forth the reasons for granting or denying the exception request. Each request for an exception, and FTA's action on the request, are available for public inspection under the provisions of 49 CFR part 601, subpart C.
 661.11   Rolling stock procurements.
(a) The provisions of  661.5 do not apply to the procurement of buses and other rolling stock (including train control, communication, and traction power equipment), if the cost of components produced in the United States is more than 60 percent of the cost of all components and final assembly takes place in the United States.
(b) The domestic content requirements in paragraph (a) of this section also apply to the domestic content requirements for components set forth in paragraphs (i), (j), and (l) of this section.
(c) A component is any article, material, or supply, whether manufactured or unmanufactured, that is directly incorporated into an end product at the final assembly location.
(d) A component may be manufactured at the final assembly location if the manufacturing process to produce the component is an activity separate and distinct from the final assembly of the end product.
(e) A component is considered to be manufactured if there are sufficient activities taking place to advance the value or improve the condition of the subcomponents of that component; that is, if the subcomponents have been substantially transformed or merged into a new and functionally different article.
(f) Except as provided in paragraph (k) of this section, a subcomponent is any article, material, or supply, whether manufactured or unmanufactured, that is one step removed from a component (as defined in paragraph (c) of this section) in the manufacturing process and that is incorporated directly into a component.
(g) For a component to be of domestic origin, more that 60 percent of the subcomponents of that component, by cost, must be of domestic origin, and the manufacture of the component must take place in the United States. If, under the terms of this part, a component is determined to be of domestic origin, its entire cost may be used in calculating the cost of domestic content of an end product.
(h) A subcomponent is of domestic origin if it is manufactured in the United States.
(i) If a subcomponent manufactured in the United States is exported for inclusion in a component that is manufactured outside the United States and it receives tariff exemptions under the procedures set forth in 19 CFR 10.11 through 10.24, the subcomponent retains its domestic identity and can be included in the calculation of the domestic content of an end product even if such a subcomponent represents less than 60 percent of the cost of a particular component.
(j) If a subcomponent manufactured in the United States is exported for inclusion in a component manufactured outside the United States and it does not receive tariff exemption under the procedures set forth in 19 CFR 10.11 through 10.24, the subcomponent loses its domestic identity and cannot be included in the calculation of the domestic content of an end product.
(k) Raw materials produced in the United States and then exported for incorporation into a component are not considered to be a subcomponent for the purpose of calculating domestic content. The value of such raw materials is to be included in the cost of the foreign component.
(l) If a component is manufactured in the United States, but contains less than 60 percent domestic subcomponents, by cost, the cost of the domestic subcomponents and the cost of manufacturing the component may be included in the calculation of the domestic content of the end product.
(m) For purposes of this section, except as provided in paragraph (o) of this section:
(1) The cost of a component or a subcomponent is the price that a bidder or offeror must pay to a subcontractor or supplier for that component or subcomponent. Transportation costs to the final assembly location must be included in calculating the cost of foreign components and subcomponents.
(2) If a component or subcomponent is manufactured by the bidder or offeror, the cost of the component is the cost of labor and materials incorporated into the component or subcomponent, an allowance for profit, and the administrative and overhead costs attributable to that component or subcomponent under normal accounting principles.
(n) The cost of a component of foreign origin is set using the foreign exchange rate at the time the bidder or offeror executes the appropriate Buy America certificate.
(o) The cost of a subcomponent that retains its domestic identity consistent with paragraph (j) of this section shall be the cost of the subcomponent when last purchased, f.o.b. United States port of exportation or point of border crossing as set out in the invoice and entry papers or, if no purchase was made, the value of the subcomponent at the time of its shipment for exportation, f.o.b. United States port of exportation or point of border crossing as set out in the invoice and entry papers.
(p) In accordance with 49 U.S.C. 5323(j), labor costs involved in final assembly shall not be included in calculating component costs.
(q) The actual cost, not the bid price, of a component is to be considered in calculating domestic content.
(r) Final assembly is the creation of the end product from individual elements brought together for that purpose through application of manufacturing processes. If a system is being procured as the end product by the grantee, the installation of the system qualifies as final assembly.
(s) [Reserved]
(t) Train control equipment includes, but is not limited to, the following equipment:
(1) Mimic board in central control
(2) Dispatcher's console
(3) Local control panels
(4) Station (way side) block control relay cabinets
(5) Terminal dispatcher machines
(6) Cable/cable trays
(7) Switch machines
(8) Way side signals
(9) Impedance bonds
(10) Relay rack bungalows
(11) Central computer control
(12) Brake equipment
(13) Brake systems
(14) Cab Signaling;
(15) ATO Equipment;
(16) ATP Equipment;
(17) Wayside Transponders;
(18) Trip Stop Equipment;
(19) Wayside Magnets;
(20) Speed Measuring Devices;
(21) Car Axle Counters;
(22) Communication Based Train Control (CBTC).
(u) Communication equipment includes, but is not limited to, the following equipment:
(1) Radios
(2) Space station transmitter and receivers
(3) Vehicular and hand-held radios
(4) PABX telephone switching equipment
(5) PABX telephone instruments
(6) Public address amplifiers
(7) Public address speakers
(8) Cable transmission system cable
(9) Cable transmission system multiplex equipment
(10) Communication console at central control
(11) Uninterruptible power supply inverters/rectifiers
(12) Uninterruptible power supply batteries
(13) Data transmission system central processors
(14) Data transmission system remote terminals
(15) Line printers for data transmission system
(16) Communication system monitor test panel
(17) Security console at central control
(18) Antennas;
(19) Wireless Telemetry Equipment;
(20) Passenger Information Displays;
(21) Communications Control Units;
(22) Communication Control Heads;
(23) Wireless Intercar Transceivers;
(24) Multiplexers;
(25) SCADA Systems;
(26) LED Arrays;
(27) Screen Displays such as LEDs and LCDs for communication systems;
(28) Fiber-optic transmission equipment;
(29) Fiber-optic transmission equipment;
(30) Frame or cell based multiplexing equipment; 13) Communication system network elements.
(v) Traction power equipment includes, but is not limited to the following:
(1) Primary AC switch gear
(2) Primary AC transformer rectifiers
(3) DC switch gear
(4) Traction power console and CRT display system at central control
(5) Bus ducts with buses (AC and DC)
(6) Batteries
(7) Traction power rectifier assemblies
(8) Distribution panels (AC and DC)
(9) Facility step-down transformers
(10) Motor control centers (facility use only)
(11) Battery chargers
(12) Supervisory control panel
(13) Annunciator panels
(14) Low voltage facility distribution switch board
(15) DC connect switches
(16) Negative bus boxes
(17) Power rail insulators
(18) Power cables (AC and DC)
(19) Cable trays
(20) Instrumentation for traction power equipment
(21) Connectors, tensioners, and insulators for overhead power wire systems
(22) Negative drainage boards
(23) Inverters
(24) Traction motors
(25) Propulsion gear boxes
(26) Third rail pick-up equipment
(27) Pantographs
(28) Propulsion Control Systems;
(29) Surge Arrestors;
(30) Protective Relaying.
(31) Bimetallic power rail.
(w) The power or third rail is not considered traction power equipment and is thus subject to the requirements of 49 U.S.C. 5323(j) and the requirements of  661.5.
(x) A bidder on a contract for an item covered by 49 U.S.C. 5323(j) who will comply with section 165(b)(3) and regulations in this section is not required to follow the application for waiver procedures set out in  661.9. In lieu of these procedures, the bidder must submit the appropriate certificate required by  661.12.
Appendix A to  661.11 - General Waivers
(a) The provisions of  661.11 of this part do not apply when foreign sourced spare parts for buses and other rolling stock (including train control, communication, and traction power equipment) whose total cost is 10 percent or less of the overall project contract cost are being procured as part of the same contract for the major capital item.
(b) [Reserved]
Appendix B to  661.11 - Typical Components of Buses
The following is a list of items that typically would be considered components of a bus. This list is not all-inclusive.
Car body shells, egines, transmissions, front axle assemblies, rear axle assemblies, drive shaft assemblies, front suspension assemblies, rear suspension assemblies, air compressor and pneumatic systems, generator/alternator and electrical systems, steering system assemblies, front and rear air brake assemblies, air conditioning compressor assemblies, air conditioning evaporator/condenser assemblies, heating systems. passenger seats, driver's seat assemblies, window assemblies, entrance and exit door assemblies, door control systems, destination sign assemblies, interior lighting assemblies, front and rear end cap assemblies, front and rear bumper assemblies, specialty steel (structural steel tubing, etc.) aluminum extrusions, aluminum, steel or fiberglass exterior panels, and interior trim, flooring, and floor coverings.
Appendix C to  661.11 - Typical Components of Rail Rolling Stock
The following is a list of items that typically would be considered components of rail rolling stock. This list is not all inclusive.
Car shells, engines, main transformer, pantographs, traction motors, propulsion gear boxes, interior linings, acceleration and braking resistors, propulsion controls, low voltage auxiliary power supplies, air conditioning equipment, air brake compressors, brake controls, foundation brake equipment, articulation assemblies, train control systems, window assemblies, communication equipment, lighting, seating, doors, door actuators and controls, wheelchair lifts and ramps to make the vehicle accessible to persons with disabilities, couplers and draft gear, trucks, journal bearings, axles, diagnostic equipment, and third rail pick-up equipment.
Appendix D to  661.11 - Minimum Requirements for Final Assembly
(a) Rail Cars: In the case of the manufacture of a new rail car, final assembly would typically include, as a minimum, the following operations: installation and interconnection of propulsion control equipment, propulsion cooling equipment, brake equipment, energy sources for auxiliaries and controls, heating and air conditioning, communications equipment, motors, wheels and axles, suspensions and frames; the inspection and verification of all installation and interconnection work; and the in-plant testing of the stationary product to verify all functions.
(b) Buses: In the case of a new bus, final assembly would typically include, at a minimum, the installation and interconnection of the engine, transmission, axles, including the cooling and braking systems; the installation and interconnection of the heating and air conditioning equipment; the installation of pneumatic and electrical systems, door systems, passenger seats, passenger grab rails, destination signs, wheelchair lifts; and road testing, final inspection, repairs and preparation of the vehicles for delivery.
(c) If a manufacturer's final assembly processes do not include all the activities that are typically considered the minimum requirements, it can request a Federal Transit Administration (FTA) determination of compliance. FTA will review these requests on a case-by-case basis to determine compliance with Buy America.
 661.12   Certification requirement for procurement of buses, other rolling stock and associated equipment.
If buses or other rolling stock (including train control, communication, and traction power equipment) are being procured, the appropriate certificate as set forth below shall be completed and submitted by each bidder in accordance with the requirement contained in  661.13(b) of this part.
Certificate of Compliance with Buy America Rolling Stock Requirements 
The bidder or offeror hereby certifies that it will comply with the requirements of 49 U.S.C. 5323(j), and the applicable regulations of 49 CFR 661.11.
Date 
Signature 
Company 
Name 
Title
 Certificate of Non-Compliance with Buy America Rolling Stock Requirements 
The bidder or offeror hereby certifies that it cannot comply with the requirements of 49 U.S.C. 5323(j), but may qualify for an exception to the requirement consistent with 49 U.S.C. 5323(j)(2)(C), and the applicable regulations in 49 CFR 661.7.
Date 
Signature 
Company 
Name 
Title
 661.13   Grantee responsibility.
(a) The grantee shall adhere to the Buy America clause set forth in its grant contract with FTA.
(b) The grantee shall include in its bid or request for proposal (RFP) specification for procurement within the scope of this part an appropriate notice of the Buy America provision. Such specifications shall require, as a condition of responsiveness, that the bidder or offeror submit with the bid or offer a completed Buy America certificate in accordance with  661.6 or 661.12 of this part, as appropriate.
(1) A bidder or offeror who has submitted an incomplete Buy America certificate or an incorrect certificate of noncompliance through inadvertent or clerical error (but not including failure to sign the certificate, submission of certificates of both compliance and non-compliance, or failure to submit any certification), may submit to the FTA Chief Counsel within ten (10) days of bid opening of submission or a final offer, a written explanation of the circumstances surrounding the submission of the incomplete or incorrect certification in accordance with 28 U.S.C. 1746, sworn under penalty of perjury, stating that the submission resulted from inadvertent or clerical error. The bidder or offeror will also submit evidence of intent, such as information about the origin of the product, invoices, or other working documents. The bidder or offeror will simultaneously send a copy of this information to the FTA grantee.
(i) The FTA Chief Counsel may request additional information from the bidder or offeror, if necessary. The grantee may not make a contract award until the FTA Chief Counsel issues his/her determination, except as provided in  661.15(m).
(ii) [Reserved]
(2) For negotiated procurements, compliance with the Buy America requirements shall be determined on the basis of the certification submitted with the final offer or final revised proposal. However, where a grantee awards on the basis of initial proposals without discussion, the certification submitted with the initial proposal shall control.
(3) Certification based on ignorance of the proper application of the Buy America requirements is not an inadvertent or clerical error. 
(c) Whether or not a bidder or offeror certifies that it will comply with the applicable requirement, such bidder or offeror is bound by its original certification (in the case of a sealed bidding procurement) or its certification submitted with its final offer (in the case of a negotiated procurement) and is not permitted to change its certification after bid opening or submission of a final offer. Where a bidder or offeror certifies that it will comply with the applicable Buy America requirements, the bidder, offeror, or grantee is not eligible for a waiver of those requirements.
 661.15   Investigation procedures.
(a) It is presumed that a bidder or offeror who has submitted the required Buy America certificate is complying with the Buy America provision. A false certification is a criminal act in violation of 18 U.S.C. 1001.
(b) Any party may petition FTA to investigate the compliance of a successful bidder or offeror with the bidder's or offeror's certification. That party (the petitioner) must include in the petition a statement of the grounds of the petition and any supporting documentation. If FTA determines that the information presented in the petition indicates that the presumption in paragraph (a) of this section has been overcome, FTA will initiate an investigation.
(c) In appropriate circumstances, FTA may determine on its own to initiate an investigation without receiving a petition from a third party.
(d) When FTA determines under paragraph (b) or (c) of this section to conduct an investigation, it requests that the grantee require the successful bidder or offeror to document its compliance with its Buy America certificate. The successful bidder or offeror has the burden of proof to establish that it is in compliance. Documentation of compliance is based on the specific circumstances of each investigation, and FTA will specify the documentation required in each case.
(e) The grantee shall reply to the request under paragraph (d) of this section within 15 working days of the request. The investigated party may correspond directly with FTA during the course of investigation, if it informs the grantee that it intends to do so, and if the grantee agrees to such action in writing. The grantee must inform FTA, in writing, that the investigated party will respond directly to FTA. An investigated party may provide confidential or proprietary information (see paragraph (l) of this section) directly to FTA while providing other information required to be submitted as part of the investigation through the grantee.
(f) Any additional information requested or required by FTA must be submitted within 5 working days after the receipt of such request unless specifically exempted by FTA.
(g) The grantee's reply (or that of the bidder or offeror) will be transmitted to the petitioner. The petitioner may submit comments on the reply to FTA within 10 working days after receipt of the reply. The grantee and the low bidder or offeror will be furnished with a copy of the petitioner's comments, and their comments must be received by FTA within 5 working days after receipt of the petitioner's comments.
(h) The failure of a party to comply with the time limits stated in this section may result in resolution of the investigation without consideration of untimely filed comments.
(i) During the course of an investigation, with appropriate notification to affected parties, FTA may conduct site visits of manufacturing facilities and final assembly locations as it considers appropriate.
(j) FTA will, upon request, make available to any interested party information bearing on the substance of the investigation which has been submitted by the petitioner, interested parties or grantees, except to the extent that withholding of information is permitted or required by law or regulation.
(k) If a party submitting information considers that the information submitted contains proprietary material which should be withheld, a statement advising FTA of this fact may be included, and the alleged proprietary information must be identified wherever it appears. Any comments on the information provided shall be submitted within a maximum of ten days.
(l) For purposes of paragraph (j) of this section, confidential or proprietary material is any material or data whose disclosure could reasonably be expected to cause substantial competitive harm to the party claiming that the material is confidential or proprietary.
(m) When a petition for investigation has been filed before award, the grantee will not make an award before the resolution of the investigation, unless the grantee determines that:
(1) The items to be procured are urgently required;
(2) Delivery of performance will be unduly delayed by failure to make the award promptly; or
(3) Failure to make prompt award will otherwise cause undue harm to the grantee or the Federal Government.
(n) In the event that the grantee determines that the award is to be made during the pendency of an investigation, the grantee will notify FTA before to making such award. FTA reserves the right not to participate in the funding of any contract awarded during the pendency of an investigation.
(o) Initial decisions by FTA will be in written form. Reconsideration of an initial decision of FTA may be requested by any party involved in an investigation. FTA will only reconsider a decision only if the party requesting reconsideration submits new matters of fact or points of law that were not known or available to the party during the investigation. A request for reconsideration of a decision of FTA shall be filed not later than ten (10) working days after the initial written decision. A request for reconsideration will be subject to the procedures in this section consistent with the need for prompt resolution of the matter.
 661.17   Failure to comply with certification.
If a successful bidder or offeror fails to demonstrate that it is in compliance with its certification, it will be required to take the necessary steps in order to achieve compliance. If a bidder or offeror takes these necessary steps, it will not be allowed to change its original bid price or the price of its final offer. If a bidder or offeror does not take the necessary steps, it will not be awarded the contract if the contract has not yet been awarded, and it is in breach of contract if a contract has been awarded.
 661.18   Intentional violations.
A person shall be ineligible to receive any contract or subcontract made with funds authorized under the Federal Public Transportation Act of 2005 pursuant to part 29 of this title if it has been determined by a court or Federal agency that the person intentionally - 
(a) Affixed a label bearing a Made in America inscription, or an inscription with the same meaning, to a product not made in the United States, but sold in or shipped to the United States and used in projects to which this section applies, or
(b) Otherwise represented that any such product was produced in the United States.
 661.19   Sanctions.
A willful refusal to comply with a certification by a successful bidder or offeror may lead to the initiation of debarment or suspension proceedings under part 29 of this title.
 661.20   Rights of parties.
(a) A party adversely affected by an FTA action under this subsection shall have the right to seek review under the Administrative Procedure Act (APA), 5 U.S.C. 702 et seq.
(b) Except as provided in paragraph (a) of this section, the sole right of any third party under the Buy America provision is to petition FTA under the provisions of  661.15 of this part. No third party has any additional right, at law or equity, for any remedy including, but not limited to, injunctions, damages, or cancellation of the Federal grant or contracts of the grantee.
 661.21   State Buy America provisions.
(a) Except as provided in paragraph (b) of this section, any State may impose more stringent Buy America or buy national requirements than contained in section 165 of the Act and the regulations in this part.
(b) FTA will not participate in contracts governed by the following:
(1) State Buy America or Buy National preference provisions which are not as strict as the Federal requirements.
(2) State and local Buy National or Buy America preference provisions which are not explicitly set out under State law. For example, administrative interpretations of non-specific State legislation will not control.
(3) State and local Buy Local preference provisions.
PART 1241 - ANNUAL, SPECIAL, OR PERIODIC REPORTS - CARRIERS SUBJECT TO PART I OF THE INTERSTATE COMMERCE ACT
Authority:49 U.S.C. 11145.
Note:
The report forms prescribed by part 1241 are available upon request from the Office of Economics, Surface Transportation Board, Washington, DC.
 1241.1   Common carriers.
All common carriers subject to the provisions of Part I of Interstate Commerce Act, as amended, and the owners of all railroads engaged in interstate commerce as therein defined, are hereby required hereafter to file in the office of the Board on or before the 31st day of March in each year, reports covering the period of 12 months ending with the 31st day of December preceding said date, giving the particulars heretofore called for in the annual reports required by the Board of said carriers and owners of railroads.
 1241.2   Reporting companies defined.
(a) Every common carrier by rail which is required by the act to regulate commerce to file with the Board any tariff or schedule of rates, fares, or charges, or any concurrence in such tariff or schedule, shall be required to keep operating accounts and to file an annual operating report unless specifically excused by the Board.
(b) Every railway corporation owning but not operating a railway used in interstate or foreign commerce shall be required to file with the Board an annual nonoperating report unless relieved therefrom under the provisions of rule following.
(c) Any actually existing inactive corporation coming within the scope of rule given above may be relieved from the requirements of that rule if it has no outstanding stocks or obligations not held by or for its controlling corporation and the controlling corporation reports for the inactive corporation such facts as the Board may require to be reported.
(d) Reports of a controlling corporation and its controlled corporations must exclude duplications in respect of investments in railway plant and equipment and in respect of securities outstanding.
 1241.11   Annual reports of class I railroads.
(a) Commencing with reports for the year ended December 31, 1973, and thereafter, until further order, all line-haul railroad companies of class I, as defined in  1240.1 of this chapter, subject to section 20, Part I of the Interstate Commerce Act, are required to file annual reports in accordance with Railroad Annual Report Form R-1. Such annual report shall be filed in duplicate in the office of the Office of Economics, Surface Transportation Board, Washington, DC, on or before March 31 of the year following the year which is being reported.
(b) Expenditures and certain statistical information, as described below, for Positive Train Control (PTC) installation, maintenance, and operation shall be separately identified in a supplement to the Railroad Annual Report Form R-1 and submitted with the Railroad Annual Report Form R-1. This supplement shall identify PTC-related expenditures on road property and equipment improvements, depreciation of road property and equipment, accumulated depreciation, investment in railway property, and railway operating expenses. The supplement shall also identify the total mileage on which carriers install PTC and the number of locomotives equipped with PTC. The supplement shall include PTC-related expenditures for passenger-only service not otherwise captured in the individual schedules. In addition to separating capital expenses and operating expenses incurred by the railroad for PTC, the respondent entity shall include the value of funds received from non-government and government transfers to include grants, subsidies, and other contributions or reimbursements that the respondent entity used to purchase or create PTC assets or to offset PTC costs.
(49 U.S.C. 220, 313, 412 and 10321; 5 U.S.C. 553)
 1241.15   Railroad classification survey form.
Commencing with the year ending December 31, 1982, and thereafter, until further order, all railroad companies not required to file an Annual Report (Form R-1) shall compute their adjusted revenues using the railroad revenue deflator formula. If there is a change in a carrier's classification the survey form shall be filed with the Office of Economics, Surface Transportation Board, Washington, DC, on or before March 31.

PART 830 - NOTIFICATION AND REPORTING OF AIRCRAFT ACCIDENTS OR INCIDENTS AND OVERDUE AIRCRAFT, AND PRESERVATION OF AIRCRAFT WRECKAGE, MAIL, CARGO, AND RECORDS
Authority:49 U.S.C. 1101-1155; Pub. L. 85-726, 72 Stat. 731 (codified as amended at 49 U.S.C. 40101).
Source:53 FR 36982, Sept. 23, 1988, unless otherwise noted.
Subpart A - General
 830.1   Applicability.
This part contains rules pertaining to:
(a) Initial notification and later reporting of aircraft incidents and accidents and certain other occurrences in the operation of aircraft, wherever they occur, when they involve civil aircraft of the United States; when they involve certain public aircraft, as specified in this part, wherever they occur; and when they involve foreign civil aircraft where the events occur in the United States, its territories, or its possessions.
(b) Preservation of aircraft wreckage, mail, cargo, and records involving all civil and certain public aircraft accidents, as specified in this part, in the United States and its territories or possessions.
 830.2   Definitions.
As used in this part the following words or phrases are defined as follows:
Aircraft accident means an occurrence associated with the operation of an aircraft which takes place between the time any person boards the aircraft with the intention of flight and all such persons have disembarked, and in which any person suffers death or serious injury, or in which the aircraft receives substantial damage. For purposes of this part, the definition of aircraft accident includes unmanned aircraft accident, as defined herein.
Civil aircraft means any aircraft other than a public aircraft.
Fatal injury means any injury which results in death within 30 days of the accident.
Incident means an occurrence other than an accident, associated with the operation of an aircraft, which affects or could affect the safety of operations.
Operator means any person who causes or authorizes the operation of an aircraft, such as the owner, lessee, or bailee of an aircraft.
Public aircraft means an aircraft used only for the United States Government, or an aircraft owned and operated (except for commercial purposes) or exclusively leased for at least 90 continuous days by a government other than the United States Government, including a State, the District of Columbia, a territory or possession of the United States, or a political subdivision of that government. Public aircraft does not include a government-owned aircraft transporting property for commercial purposes and does not include a government-owned aircraft transporting passengers other than: transporting (for other than commercial purposes) crewmembers or other persons aboard the aircraft whose presence is required to perform, or is associated with the performance of, a governmental function such as firefighting, search and rescue, law enforcement, aeronautical research, or biological or geological resource management; or transporting (for other than commercial purposes) persons aboard the aircraft if the aircraft is operated by the Armed Forces or an intelligence agency of the United States. Notwithstanding any limitation relating to use of the aircraft for commercial purposes, an aircraft shall be considered to be a public aircraft without regard to whether it is operated by a unit of government on behalf of another unit of government pursuant to a cost reimbursement agreement, if the unit of government on whose behalf the operation is conducted certifies to the Administrator of the Federal Aviation Administration that the operation was necessary to respond to a significant and imminent threat to life or property (including natural resources) and that no service by a private operator was reasonably available to meet the threat.
Serious injury means any injury which: (1) Requires hospitalization for more than 48 hours, commencing within 7 days from the date of the injury was received; (2) results in a fracture of any bone (except simple fractures of fingers, toes, or nose); (3) causes severe hemorrhages, nerve, muscle, or tendon damage; (4) involves any internal organ; or (5) involves second- or third-degree burns, or any burns affecting more than 5 percent of the body surface.
Substantial damage means damage or failure which adversely affects the structural strength, performance, or flight characteristics of the aircraft, and which would normally require major repair or replacement of the affected component. Engine failure or damage limited to an engine if only one engine fails or is damaged, bent fairings or cowling, dented skin, small punctured holes in the skin or fabric, ground damage to rotor or propeller blades, and damage to landing gear, wheels, tires, flaps, engine accessories, brakes, or wingtips are not considered substantial damage for the purpose of this part.
Unmanned aircraft accident means an occurrence associated with the operation of any public or civil unmanned aircraft system that takes place between the time that the system is activated with the purpose of flight and the time that the system is deactivated at the conclusion of its mission, in which:
(1) Any person suffers death or serious injury; or
(2) The aircraft has a maximum gross takeoff weight of 300 pounds or greater and sustains substantial damage.
Subpart B - Initial Notification of Aircraft Accidents, Incidents, and Overdue Aircraft
 830.5   Immediate notification.
The operator of any civil aircraft, or any public aircraft not operated by the Armed Forces or an intelligence agency of the United States, or any foreign aircraft shall immediately, and by the most expeditious means available, notify the nearest National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB) office,
1
 when:
1 NTSB headquarters is located at 490 L'Enfant Plaza SW., Washington, DC 20594. Contact information for the NTSB's regional offices is available at  To report an accident or incident, you may call the NTSB Response Operations Center, at 844-373-9922 or 202-314-6290.
(a) An aircraft accident or any of the following listed serious incidents occur:
(1) Flight control system malfunction or failure;
(2) Inability of any required flight crewmember to perform normal flight duties as a result of injury or illness;
(3) Failure of any internal turbine engine component that results in the escape of debris other than out the exhaust path;
(4) In-flight fire;
(5) Aircraft collision in flight;
(6) Damage to property, other than the aircraft, estimated to exceed $25,000 for repair (including materials and labor) or fair market value in the event of total loss, whichever is less.
(7) For large multiengine aircraft (more than 12,500 pounds maximum certificated takeoff weight):
(i) In-flight failure of electrical systems which requires the sustained use of an emergency bus powered by a back-up source such as a battery, auxiliary power unit, or air-driven generator to retain flight control or essential instruments;
(ii) In-flight failure of hydraulic systems that results in sustained reliance on the sole remaining hydraulic or mechanical system for movement of flight control surfaces;
(iii) Sustained loss of the power or thrust produced by two or more engines; and
(iv) An evacuation of an aircraft in which an emergency egress system is utilized.
(8) Release of all or a portion of a propeller blade from an aircraft, excluding release caused solely by ground contact;
(9) A complete loss of information, excluding flickering, from more than 50 percent of an aircraft's cockpit displays known as:
(i) Electronic Flight Instrument System (EFIS) displays;
(ii) Engine Indication and Crew Alerting System (EICAS) displays;
(iii) Electronic Centralized Aircraft Monitor (ECAM) displays; or
(iv) Other displays of this type, which generally include a primary flight display (PFD), primary navigation display (PND), and other integrated displays;
(10) Airborne Collision and Avoidance System (ACAS) resolution advisories issued when an aircraft is being operated on an instrument flight rules flight plan and compliance with the advisory is necessary to avert a substantial risk of collision between two or more aircraft.
(11) Damage to helicopter tail or main rotor blades, including ground damage, that requires major repair or replacement of the blade(s);
(12) Any event in which an operator, when operating an airplane as an air carrier at a public-use airport on land:
(i) Lands or departs on a taxiway, incorrect runway, or other area not designed as a runway; or
(ii) Experiences a runway incursion that requires the operator or the crew of another aircraft or vehicle to take immediate corrective action to avoid a collision.
(b) An aircraft is overdue and is believed to have been involved in an accident.
 830.6   Information to be given in notification.
The notification required in  830.5 shall contain the following information, if available:
(a) Type, nationality, and registration marks of the aircraft;
(b) Name of owner, and operator of the aircraft;
(c) Name of the pilot-in-command;
(d) Date and time of the accident;
(e) Last point of departure and point of intended landing of the aircraft;
(f) Position of the aircraft with reference to some easily defined geographical point;
(g) Number of persons aboard, number killed, and number seriously injured;
(h) Nature of the accident, the weather and the extent of damage to the aircraft, so far as is known; and
(i) A description of any explosives, radioactive materials, or other dangerous articles carried.
Subpart C - Preservation of Aircraft Wreckage, Mail, Cargo, and Records
 830.10   Preservation of aircraft wreckage, mail, cargo, and records.
(a) The operator of an aircraft involved in an accident or incident for which notification must be given is responsible for preserving to the extent possible any aircraft wreckage, cargo, and mail aboard the aircraft, and all records, including all recording mediums of flight, maintenance, and voice recorders, pertaining to the operation and maintenance of the aircraft and to the airmen until the Board takes custody thereof or a release is granted pursuant to  831.12(b) of this chapter.
(b) Prior to the time the Board or its authorized representative takes custody of aircraft wreckage, mail, or cargo, such wreckage, mail, or cargo may not be disturbed or moved except to the extent necessary:
(1) To remove persons injured or trapped;
(2) To protect the wreckage from further damage; or
(3) To protect the public from injury.
(c) Where it is necessary to move aircraft wreckage, mail or cargo, sketches, descriptive notes, and photographs shall be made, if possible, of the original positions and condition of the wreckage and any significant impact marks.
(d) The operator of an aircraft involved in an accident or incident shall retain all records, reports, internal documents, and memoranda dealing with the accident or incident, until authorized by the Board to the contrary.
Subpart D - Reporting of Aircraft Accidents, Incidents, and Overdue Aircraft
 830.15   Reports and statements to be filed.
(a) Reports. The operator of a civil, public (as specified in  830.5), or foreign aircraft shall file a report on Board Form 6120.
1/2 (OMB No. 3147-0001) 
2
 within 10 days after an accident, or after 7 days if an overdue aircraft is still missing. A report on an incident for which immediate notification is required by  830.5(a) shall be filed only as requested by an authorized representative of the Board.
2 Forms are available from the Board field offices (see footnote 1), from Board headquarters in Washington, DC, and from the Federal Aviation Administration Flight Standards District Offices.
(b) Crewmember statement. Each crewmember, if physically able at the time the report is submitted, shall attach a statement setting forth the facts, conditions, and circumstances relating to the accident or incident as they appear to him. If the crewmember is incapacitated, he shall submit the statement as soon as he is physically able.
(c) Where to file the reports. The operator of an aircraft shall file any report with the field office of the Board nearest the accident or incident.

PART 1280 - HANDLING OF NATIONAL SECURITY INFORMATION AND CLASSIFIED MATERIAL
Authority:E.O. 12356.
Source:49 FR 7832, Mar. 2, 1984, unless otherwise noted.
 1280.1   Purpose.
To set forth those provisions of the Surface Transportation Board Security Regulations to the extent that they affect the general public.
 1280.2   Policy.
It is the policy of the Surface Transportation Board to act in accordance with Executive Order 12356, dated April 6, 1982, in matters relating to national security information.
 1280.3   Authority to classify.
The Board does not have authority of its own to classify any of its internally generated documents. The only documents handled by the Board which are classified as confidential, secret, or top secret are those generated by Executive Branch Agencies with original classification authority.
 1280.4   Responsibility for handling of classified documents.
(a) Responsible Official. Primary responsibility for the handling of classified documents shall rest with the Assistant to the Director of the Office of Compliance and Consumer Assistance, who is also Emergency Coordinator for the Board. All documents bearing the terms Top Secret, Secret, and Confidential shall be delivered to the Emergency Coordinator or his/her alternate immediately upon receipt. The alternate is also an Assistant to the Director of the Office of Compliance and Consumer Assistance as set forth in  1280.4(b) of the rules. All potential recipients of such documents shall be advised of the name of the Emergency Coordinator. In the event that the Emergency Coordinator or his/her alternate is not available to receive such documents, they shall be turned over to the Associate Director, Office of Compliance and Consumer Assistance, and secured, unopened, in the combination safe located in Room 5325 of the headquarters building until the Emergency Coordinator or alternate is available. All material not immediately deliverable to either the Emergency Coordinator, alternate, or the Associate Director, Office of Compliance and Consumer Assistance, shall be delivered at the earliest opportunity. Under no circumstances shall classified material that cannot be delivered to the Emergency Coordinator be stored other than in the designated safe in Room 5325 of the STB headquarters building.
(b) The alternate to the Emergency Coordinator for the receipt and handling of documents mentioned in paragraph (a) of this section, shall be the other Assistant to the Director, Office of Compliance and Consumer Assistance.
(c) Any person whose position requires access to classified information must execute Form SF #189.
(d) Any contracts with media representatives by personnel with access to classified material and involving such material will be cleared through the Emergency Coordinator and more than one person shall be present during any briefing or interview.
 1280.5   Safeguarding of classified material.
(a) Reproduction of classified material shall take place only when absolutely necessary, and in accordance with section 2001.46 of the Directive. Should copies be made, they are subject to the same controls as the original document. Records showing the number and distribution of copies shall be maintained by the Emergency Coordinator and the log stored with the original documents.
(b) Any suspected or actual unauthorized disclosures of classified information shall be reported to the Emergency Coordinator or Alternate. An immediate investigation will be undertaken by the Emergency Coordinator or Alternate to establish all facts surrounding the disclosure. The Emergency Coordinator or Alternate shall ascertain the nature of the information disclosed and the extent to which it has been disseminated and will maintain records of disclosures as evaluated and investigated.
(c) Any suspected or actual unauthorized disclosure of classified information will be reported as soon as possible to the Department of Justice and the Information Security Oversight Office.
(d) Any unauthorized disclosure of classified information or any failure to cooperate with the investigation of unauthorized disclosures by an employee shall be cause for appropriate disciplinary or other remedial action as provided in the Board's Canons of Conduct, 49 CFR 1000.735-31.
 1280.6   Storage of classified documents.
All classified documents shall be stored in the safe located in Room 5325 of the STB headquarters building. In those instances where the Emergency Coordinator is not available to receive classified documents, they may be stored, unopened, in the safe located in Room 5325.
 1280.7   Education of employees.
All employees who have been granted a security clearance and who have occasion to handle classified materials shall be advised of the procedures outlined in 49 CFR part 1280. They shall also be required to review Executive Order 12356 and appropriate directives of the Information Security Oversight Office (ISOO). This shall be achieved by a memorandum to all affected employees at the time these procedures are implemented, and by appropriate instructions to new employees receiving security clearances in the future.
 1280.8   Requests for mandatory review.
Because the Board does not itself generate classified documents, any requests made for mandatory review shall be coordinated by the Emergency Coordinator with appropriate officials of the Department or Agency responsible for issuance of the document involved.
PART 1103 - PRACTITIONERS
Authority:21 U.S.C. 862; 49 U.S.C. 1303(c), 1321.
Source:47 FR 49549, Nov. 1, 1982, unless otherwise noted.
Subpart A - General Information
 1103.1   Register of practitioners.
The Board maintains a register containing the names of all non-attorneys entitled to practice before it. The register is maintained according to the individual non-attorney practitioner's name and not by corporate or firm name. Corporations and firms are not admitted or recognized as practitioners before the Board.
 1103.2   Attorneys-at-law - qualifications and requirements to practice before the Board.
Any person who is a member in good standing of the bar of the highest court of any State, Commonwealth, possession, territory, or the District of Columbia may represent persons before the Board.
 1103.3   Persons not attorneys-at-law - qualifications and requirements for practice before the Board.
(a) In general. Any citizen or resident of the United States, not an attorney-at-law, who files an application for admission to practice, accompanied by the payment of the fee prescribed by rule or order of the Board, and who successfully completes the practitioners' examination, and shows that applicant possesses the necessary legal and technical qualifications to enable applicant to render valuable service before the Board and that applicant is competent to advise and assist in the presentation of matters before the Board, may be permitted to practice before the Board.
(b) Qualifications standards. A non-attorney applicant for admission to practice must meet one of the following requirements:
(1) An applicant must have completed 2 years (60 semester hours or 90 quarter hours) of post secondary education and must possess technical knowledge, training or experience in the field of transportation which is regarded by the Board as the equivalent of 2 additional years of college education;
(2) An applicant must have worked in the field of transportation for at least 10 years;
(3) An applicant must have received a bachelor's degree with at least 12 semester hours or 18 quarter hours in transportation or business; or 
(4) An applicant must have received a bachelor's degree and worked in the field of transportation for at least one year. An applicant's statement of college education must be supported by a transcript of records attached to the original application. Transcripts from any college accredited by the U.S. Department of Education will be accepted without question. With all other institutions, the burden of proof is on the applicant to establish that the formal education satisfies the standards set forth above. The qualifications standards are intended as general guidelines. Individual situations that vary from the standards will continue to be evaluated on their own merits. 
(c)(1) Application for admission. An application filed pursuant to this rule under oath for admission to practice shall be submitted between January and May 1 of the year in which the examination is to be taken. The application is to be completed in full on the form provided by the Board, and shall be addressed to the Director, Office of Public Assistance, Governmental Affairs, and Compliance, Surface Transportation Board, Washington, DC 20423-0001, to the attention of the room number indicated on the form.
(2) Certification: All applicants must complete the following certification:
I, _____ (Name) _____, certify under penalty of perjury under the laws of the United States, that I have not been convicted, after September 1, 1989, of any Federal or State offense involving the distribution or possession of a controlled substance, or that if I have been so convicted, I am not ineligible to receive Federal Benefits, either by court order or operation of law, pursuant to 21 U.S.C. 862.
(d) Application fee. Each application filed pursuant to this rule must be accompanied by the non-refundable fee in the amount set forth in 49 CFR 1002.2(f)(99)(i). Payment must be made either by check, money order or credit card payable to the Surface Transportation Board. Cash payment will not be accepted.
(e) Additional certification. (1) When an application meets the required standards, a copy will be referred to the Association of Surface Transportation Board Practitioners for a report to the Board as to the reputation and character of the applicant. Inquiry also will be made by the Board of the sponsors as to their knowledge of the applicant's legal and technical qualifications as contemplated by the Board's Rules of Practice. If the Board is satisfied as to the applicant's qualifications, reputation and character, then applicant will be considered eligible to take the examination. 
(2) The Board may require an applicant's sponsors to provide a detailed statement of the nature and extent of their knowledge of applicant's qualifications. Upon consideration of this material, if the Board is not satisfied as to the adequacy of applicant's qualifications, the applicant will be notified by registered mail. Applicant may then request a hearing to prove his qualifications. If applicant makes such a request, the Board will allow a hearing. In the absence of a request for a hearing within 20 days after receipt of the notice, the application will be considered withdrawn. 
(f) Scope of examination. If applicant meets the educational and experience standards, and is found to be of good character, the applicant will be permitted to take the examination. The examination tests the applicant's experience and knowledge of the principal regulations, laws, and economic principles in the field of transportation as well as knowledge of the Board's Rules of Practice and Canons of Ethics. 
(g) Time and place of examination. The examination will be conducted once a year on the second Tuesday in July. Notice of the time and place to appear for the examination will be mailed to qualifying applicants approximately 30 days prior to the date of the examination.
(h) Location of examination. Examinations will be conducted at the Board's office in Washington, DC.
(i) Cancellation of examination. If the Board determines that there is an insufficient number of applicants to warrant conducting the examination, the Board will cancel the examination for that year. Notice of the cancellation will be mailed to applicants on or before June 15 and the application fee will be refunded. The Board will conduct the examination the next year following the cancellation of the examination.
(j) Examination results. Results will be released within 90 days after the examination. Individual results will be forwarded to the applicants at least 1 week before being publicly released. To protect the privacy of those taking the examination, individual grades will not be released over the telephone to anyone. Requests for grades may, however, be submitted in writing to the Office of Public Assistance, Governmental Affairs, and Compliance to the attention of the address stated in the application form.
(k) Failure to appear for examination. Applicants who have failed to appear for, or postponed taking an examination, a total of three times without showing good cause will have any subsequently filed application returned.
(l) Failing or postponing the examination. Applicants who fail the examination may reapply by submitting a request in writing with an additional filing fee in the amount set forth in 49 CFR 1002.2(f)(99)(i). Applicants who postpone taking the examination three times without showing good cause will have their applications returned.
(m) The filing fee in the amount set forth in 49 CFR 1002.2(f)(99)(i) is not refundable.
(n) Any application resubmitted to the Board after being returned must be accompanied by a filing fee in the amount set forth in 49 CFR 1002.2(f)(99)(i).
(o) Content and grading of examination. A Board staff member is responsible, under the general supervision of the Vice Chairman, for the examination of non-attorney applicants, the preparation of examination questions, and the grading of examinations. The staff member is appointed by the Chairman, with the approval of the Board. The staff member must be an attorney and must have at least two years of experience with the Board.
(p) Applicant's oath. No applicant shall be admitted to practice before the Board until applicant shall subscribe to an oath or affirmation that applicant will conduct practice uprightly and according to the law, as a practitioner before the Board, and that applicant will support the Constitution of the United States and laws of the United States and will conform to the rules and regulations of the Board.
 1103.4   Initial appearances.
Practitioners shall file a declaration that they are authorized to represent the particular party on whose behalf they appear at the time of making an initial appearance, in all proceedings. This requirement can be met by:
(a) Entering the practitioner's name as the representative of an applicant in the appropriate space on an application form;
(b) Signing any complaint, petition, protest, reply or other pleading with a designation following the practitioner's signature that he is the representative of a party;
(c) Entering an appearance at any hearing on the form provided; or
(d) Filing a letter with the Chief, Section of Administration, Office of Proceedings, Surface Transportation Board stating that practitioner is authorized to represent a party. The party represented, their address, and the docket number of the proceeding must also be identified at the time of the initial appearance.
 1103.5   Discipline.
(a) A member of the Board's bar may be subject to suspension, disbarment, or other disciplinary action if it is shown that the practitioner:
(1) Has been suspended or disbarred from practice in any court of record;
(2) Violated any of the Board's rules including the Canons of Ethics set out in  1103.10 through 1103.35; or
(3) Engaged in conduct unbecoming a member of the bar of the Board.
(b) The practitioner will be afforded an opportunity to show why he should not be suspended, disbarred, or otherwise disciplined. Upon the practitioner's timely response to the show cause order after any requested hearing, or upon failure to make a timely response to the show cause order, the Board shall issue an appropriate decision. 
Subpart B - Canons of Ethics
 1103.10   Introduction.
The following canons of ethics are adopted as a general guide for those admitted to practice before the Surface Transportation Board. The practitioners before the Board include (a) lawyers, who have been regularly admitted to practice law and (b) others who have fulfilled the requirements set forth in  1103.3. The former are bound by a broad code of ethics and unwritten rules of professional conduct which apply to every activity of a lawyer. The canons do not release the lawyer from any of the duties or principles of professional conduct by which lawyers are bound. They apply similarly to all practitioners before the Board, but do not negate the applicability of other ethical codes. The canons are organized under three headings, The Practitioner's Duties and Responsibilities to the Board, The Practitioner's Duties and Responsibilities to the Client, The Practitioner's Duties and Responsibilities to Other Litigants, Witnesses and the Public.
The Practitioner's Duties and Responsibilities Toward the Board
 1103.11   Standards of ethical conduct in courts of the United States to be observed.
These canons further the purpose of the Board's Rules of Practice which direct all persons appearing in proceedings before it to conform, as nearly as possible, to the standards of ethical conduct required of practice before the courts of the United States. Such standards are taken as the basis for these specifications and are modified as the nature of the practice before the Board requires.
 1103.12   The practitioner's duty to and attitude toward the Board.
(a) It is the duty of the practitioner to maintain a respectful attitude toward the Board and for the importance of the functions it administers. In many respects the Board functions as a Court, and practitioners should regard themselves as officers of that Court and uphold its honor and dignity.
(b) It is the right and duty of the practitioner to submit grievances about a member or employee of the Board to the proper authorities when proper grounds for complaint exists. In such cases, charges should be encouraged and the person making them should be protected.
(c) It is the duty of the practitioner to be punctual in attendance, and to be concise and direct in the trial and disposition of causes.
 1103.13   Attempts to exert political or personal influence on the Board are prohibited.
(a) It is unethical for a practitioner to attempt to influence the judgment of the Board by threats of political or personal reprisal.
(b) Marked attention and unusual hospitality on the part of a practitioner to a Board Member, administrative law judge, or other representative of the Board, which is unwarranted by the personal relationship of the parties, is subject to misconstruction of motive and should be avoided.
 1103.14   Private communications with the Board are prohibited.
To the extent that the Board acts in a quasi-judicial capacity, it is improper for litigants, directly or through any counsel or representative, to communicate privately with a Board Member, administrative law judge, or other representative of the Board about a pending case, or to argue privately the merits thereof in the absence of the adversaries or without notice to them. Practitioners at all times shall scrupulously refrain from going beyond ex parte representations which are clearly proper in view of the administrative work of the Board in their communication with the Board and its staff.
The Practitioner's Duties and Responsibilities Toward a Client
 1103.15   The practitioner's duty to clients, generally.
The practitioner shall be respectful of the law and its official ministers, and shall not be involved in corruption of public officials or deception of the public. In giving improper service or advice, the practitioner invites and deserves stern condemnation. The practitioner shall observe and advise all clients to observe the statutory law to the best of his knowledge or as interpreted by competent adjudication. The practitioner owes a general duty to practice candor toward his client with respect to all aspects to his service to the client.
 1103.16   Adverse influences and conflicting interests.
(a) At the time of the retainer, the practitioner shall disclose to the client all circumstances of his relations to the parties, and any interest in or connection with the case.
(b) It is unethical for a practitioner to represent conflicting interests, except by express consent of all concerned given after a full disclosure of the facts. Within the meaning of this section, a practitioner represents conflicting interest, when on behalf of one client, it is his duty to contend for that which duty to another client requires him to oppose.
(c) The obligation to represent the client with undivided fidelity and not to divulge secrets or confidences forbids also the subsequent acceptance of retainers or employment from others in matters adversely affecting any interest of the client with respect to which confidence has been reposed.
 1103.17   Joint association of practitioners and conflicts of opinion.
(a) A client's offer of the assistance of an additional practitioner should not be regarded as evidence of lack of confidence, but the matter should be left to the determination of the client. A practitioner shall decline association as colleague if it is objectionable to the practitioner first retained, but if the client should relieve the practitioner first retained, another may come into the case.
(b) When practitioners jointly associated in a case cannot agree as to any matter vital to the interest of the client the conflict of opinion should be frankly stated to the client for final determination. The client's decision should be accepted by them unless the nature of the difference makes it impracticable for the practitioner whose judgment has been overruled to cooperate effectively. In that event, it is the practitioner's duty to ask the client to relieve him of his obligation.
(c) It is the right of any practitioner to give proper advice to those seeking relief against an unfaithful or neglectful practitioner. The practitioner against whom the complaint is made should be notified of such action.
 1103.18   Withdrawal from employment.
The right of a practitioner to withdraw from employment, once begun, arises only from good cause. The desire or consent of the client is not always sufficient cause for withdrawal. The practitioner shall not abandon the unfinished task to the detriment of the client except for reasons of honor, or the client's persistence over the practitioner's remonstrance in presenting frivolous defenses, or the client's deliberate disregard of an obligation as to fees or expenses. In these cases, the practitioner may be warranted in withdrawing after due notice to the client with time allowed for the employment of another practitioner. Other reasons for withdrawal might include instances in which a practitioner discovers that his client has no cause and the client is determined to continue the cause, or the practitioner's own inability to conduct a case effectively. Upon withdrawing from a case, the practitioner shall refund any part of a retainer which clearly has not been earned.
 1103.19   Advising upon the merits of a client's cause.
A practitioner shall try to obtain full knowledge of his client's cause before advising thereon. The practitioner shall give a candid opinion of the merits and probable result of bringing the case or of any related pending or contemplated litigation. The practitioner shall beware of bold and confident assurances to clients, especially where employment may depend upon such assurances. Whenever a fair settlement can be reached, the client shall be advised to avoid or to end litigation. 
 1103.20   Practitioner's fees and related practices.
(a) Establishing fees. In establishing fees, a practitioner shall avoid charges which overestimate the value of his advice and services. A client's ability to pay cannot justify a charge in excess of the value of the service although a client's poverty may require a lesser charge or even no charge at all. Publicly quoted fees should be adhered to when actual charges are made. Practitioners are bound to charge no more than the quoted rates for 30 days following the date of their quotations unless a different period of time for the effectiveness of such rates is clearly specified when quoted, or unless permission to charge a higher rate is obtained from the Vice Chairman of the Board.
(b) Compensation, commission, and rebates. A practitioner shall accept no compensation, commission, rebates, or other advantages from the parties in a proceeding other than his client without the knowledge and consent of his client after full disclosure.
(c) Contingent fees. Contingent fees should be only those sanctioned by law. In no case, except a charity case, should fees be entirely contingent upon success.
(d) Division of fees. Fees for services should be divided only with another member of the bar of practitioners and should be based upon a division of service or responsibility. It is unethical for a practitioner to retain laymen to solicit his employment in pending or prospective cases, and to reward them by a share of the fees. Such a practice cannot be too severely condemned.
(e) Suing clients for fees. Controversies with clients concerning compensation are to be entered into only insofar as they are compatible with self-respect and with the right to receive reasonable compensation for services. Lawsuits against clients should be resorted to only to prevent injustice, imposition or fraud.
(f) Acquiring interest in litigation. The practitioner shall not purchase or otherwise acquire any pecuniary interest in the subject matter of litigation which the practitioner is conducting.
(g) Expenses. A practitioner may not properly agree with a client that the practitioner shall pay or bear the expenses of litigation. He may in good faith advance expenses as a matter of convenience but must do so subject to reimbursement by the client. A practitioner shall bill and collect from a client, and thereafter retain only such payments and reimbursements for expenses as have actually been incurred on behalf of the client.
(h) Witnesses' compensation. Compensation of a witness is not to be made contingent on the success of a case in which the witness is called.
(i) Dealing with trust property. Money of the client or other trust property coming into the possession of the practitioner should be reported promptly, and, except with the client's knowledge and consent, should not be commingled with the practitioner's private property or be put to the practitioner's private use.
 1103.21   How far a practitioner may go in supporting a client's cause.
A practitioner shall put forth his best effort to maintain and defend the rights of his client. Fear of disfavor of the Board or public unpopularity should not cause a practitioner to refrain from the full discharge of his duty. The client is entitled to the benefit of any and every remedy and defense authorized by law. The client may expect his counsel to assert every such remedy or defense. However, the practitioner shall act within the bounds of the law. A practitioner shall not violate the law or be involved in any manner of fraud or chicanery for any client.
 1103.22   Restraining clients from improprieties.
A practitioner should see that his clients act with the same restraint that the practitioner himself uses, particularly with reference to the client's conduct toward the Board, fellow practitioners, witnesses and other litigants. If a client persists in improper conduct, the practitioner should terminate their relationship.
 1103.23   Confidences of a client.
(a) The practitioner's duty to preserve his client's confidence outlasts the practitioner's employment by the client, and this duty extends to the practitioner's employees as well. Neither practitioner nor his employees shall accept employment which involves the disclosure or use of a client's confidences without knowledge and consent of the client even though there are other available sources of information. A practitioner shall not continue employment when he discovers that this obligation presents a conflict in his duty between the former and the new client.
(b) If a practitioner is falsely accused by his client, he is not precluded from disclosing the truth in respect to the false accusation. The announced intention of a client to commit a crime is not included in the confidence which a practitioner is bound to respect. The practitioner may properly make such disclosures to prevent the act or protect those against whom that is threatened.
The Practitioner's Duties and Responsibilities Regarding Witnesses, Other Litigants and the Public
 1103.24   Use of adverse witnesses.
A practitioner shall not be deterred from seeking information from a witness connected with or reputed to be biased in favor of an adverse party, if the ascertainment of the truth requires that such a person be called as a witness in a proceeding.
 1103.25   Treatment of witnesses, litigants and other counsel.
(a) A practitioner shall always treat adverse witnesses and other litigants with fairness and due consideration. He should never minister to the prejudice of a client in a trial or conduct in a cause. The client has no right to demand that the practitioner representing him abuse the opposing party or indulge in offensive personal attacks.
(b) A practitioner shall not attempt to obstruct Board investigations or corruptly to influence witnesses and potential witnesses during an investigation.
(c) In conducting a case it is improper for a practitioner to allude to the personal history or the personal peculiarities or idiosyncracies of practitioners on the other side, or otherwise engage in personal abuse of other practitioners. 
 1103.26   Discussion of pending litigation in the public press.
Attempts to influence the action and attitude of the members and administrative law judges of the Board through propaganda or through colored or distorted articles in the public press, should be avoided. However, it is not against the public interest or unfair to the Board if the facts of pending litigation are made known to the public through the press in a fair and unbiased manner and in dispassionate terms. When the circumstances of a particular case appear to justify a statement to the public through the press, it is unethical to make it anonymously.
 1103.27   Candor and fairness in dealing with other litigants.
(a) The conduct of practitioners before the Board and with other practitioners should be characterized by candor and fairness. The practitioner shall observe scrupulously the principles of fair dealing and just consideration for the rights of others.
(b) It is not candid or fair for a practitioner knowingly to misstate or misquote the contents of a paper, the testimony of a witness, the language or the argument of an opposing practitioner, or the language or effect of a decision or a text book; or, with knowledge of its invalidity to cite as authority a decision which has been overruled or otherwise impaired as a precedent or a statute which has been repealed; or in argument to assert as a fact that which has not been proved, or to mislead his opponent by concealing or withholding positions in his opening argument upon which his side then intends to rely.
(c) It is dishonorable to deal other than candidly with the facts in taking the statements of witnesses, in drawing affidavits and other documents, and in the presentation of cases.
(d) A practitioner shall not offer evidence which he knows the Board should reject, in order to get the same before the Board by argument for its admissibility, or arguments upon any point not properly calling for determination. He shall not introduce into an argument remarks or statements intended to influence the bystanders.
(e) A practitioner shall rely on his judgment concerning matters incidental to the trial which may, in some cases, affect the proceeding. For example, a practitioner should not force a matter to trial when there is affliction or bereavement on the part of the opposing practitioner if no harm will come from postponing the proceeding.
(f) A practitioner shall not ignore known customs or practice of the Board, even when the law permits, without giving timely notice to the opposing practitioner.
(g) Insofar as is possible, important agreements affecting the rights of the clients should be made in writing. It is, however, dishonorable to avoid performance of an agreement fairly made only because it is not made in writing.
 1103.28   Negotiations with opposing party.
A practitioner shall not in any way communicate upon the subject of controversy with a party represented by another practitioner except upon express agreement with the practitioner representing such party. He shall not negotiate or make compromises with the other party, but shall deal only with the opposing practitioner. The practitioner shall avoid everything that may tend to mislead a party not represented by a practitioner and should not advise that party as to the law.
 1103.29   Public communication and solicitation.
(a) A practitioner shall not make any public communication or solicitation for employment containing a false, fraudulent, misleading, or deceptive statement or claim. This prohibition includes, but is not limited to:
(1) The use of statements containing a material misrepresentation of fact or omission of a material fact necessary to keep the statement from being misleading;
(2) Statements intended or likely to create an unjustifiable expectation; statements of fee information which are not complete and accurate;
(3) Statements containing information on past performance or prediction of future success;
(4) Statements of prior Board employment outside the context of biographical information; statements containing a testimonial about or endorsement of a practitioner;
(5) Statements containing an opinion as to the quality of a practitioner's services, or statements intended or likely to attract clients by the use of showmanship, puffery, or self-laudation, including the use of slogans, jingles, or sensational language or format.
(b) A practitioner shall not solicit a potential client who has given the practitioner adequate notice that he does not want to receive communications from the practitioner, nor shall a practitioner make a solicitation which involves the use of undue influence.
(c) A practitioner shall not solicit a potential client who is apparently in a physical or mental condition which would make it unlikely that he could exercise reasonable, considered judgment as to the selection of a practitioner.
(d) A practitioner shall not pay or otherwise assist any other person who is not also a practitioner and a member or associate of the same firm to solicit employment for the practitioner.
(e) If a public communication is to be made through use of radio or television, it must be prerecorded and approved for broadcast by the practitioner. A recording of the actual transmission must be retained by the practitioner for a period of 1 year after the date of the final transmission.
(f) A paid advertisement must be identified as such unless it is apparent from the context that it is a paid advertisement.
(g) A practitioner shall not compensate or give anything of value to a representative of any communication medium in anticipation of or in return for professional publicity in a news item. 
 1103.30   Acceptance of employment.
(a) The practitioner must decline to conduct a case or to make a defense when convinced that it is intended merely to harass or to injure the opposing party, or to work oppression or wrong. Otherwise, it is the practitioner's right, and having accepted retainer, it becomes the practitioner's duty, to insist upon the judgment of the Board as to the merits of the client's claim. The practitioner's acceptance of a case is equivalent to the assertion that the client's case is proper for determination.
(b) No practitioner is obliged to act either as adviser or advocate for every potential client. The practitioner has the right to decline employment. Every practitioner shall decide what employment he will accept, what cases he will bring before the Board for complainants, or contest for defendants or respondents.
 1103.31   Responsibility for litigation.
The practitioner bears the responsibility for advising as to questionable transactions, bringing questionable proceedings, or urging questionable defenses. Client's instructions cannot be used as an excuse for questionable practices.
 1103.32   Discovery of imposition and deception and duty to report corrupt or dishonest conduct.
(a) The practitioner, upon detecting fraud or deception practiced against the Board or a party in a case, shall make every effort to rectify the practice by advising his client to forgo any unjustly earned advantage. If such advice is refused, the practitioner should inform the injured party or that party's practitioner so that appropriate steps may be taken.
(b) Practitioners shall expose without fear or favor before the proper tribunals any corrupt or dishonest conduct and should accept without hesitation employment against a practitioner who has wronged his client. The practitioner upon the trial of a case in which perjury has been committed owes it to the Board and to the public to bring the matter to the knowledge of the prosecuting authorities.
 1103.33   Responsibility when proposing a person for admission to practice before the Board.
The practitioner shall aid in guarding the bar of the Board against admission of candidates unfit or unqualified because deficient in either moral character or qualification. A practitioner shall propose no person for admission to practice before the Board unless from personal knowledge or after reasonable inquiry he sincerely believes and is able to vouch that such person possesses the qualifications prescribed in  1103.3. 
 1103.34   Intermediaries.
(a) The services of a practitioner should not be controlled or exploited by any lay agency, personal or corporate, which intervenes between client and practitioner. The responsibility and qualifications of the practitioner are individual. The practitioner shall avoid all relations which direct the performance of his duties in the interest of such intermediaries. The practitioner's relationship and responsibility to the client should be direct.
(b) The practitioner may accept employment from any organization (such as an association, club or trade organization) authorized by law to be a party to proceedings before the Board, to render services in such proceedings in any matter in which the organization, as an entity, is interested. This employment should only include the rendering of such services to the members of the organization in respect to the individual affairs as are consistent with the free and faithful performance of his duties to the Board.
(c) Nothing in this canon shall be construed as conflicting with  1103.20(d).
 1103.35   Partnership or professional corporation names and titles.
In the formation of a partnership or professional corporation among practitioners care should be taken to avoid any misleading name or representation which would create a false impression as to the position or privileges of a member not duly authorized to practice. No person should be held as a practitioner who is not duly qualified under  1103.2 or  1103.3 of these rules. No person who is not duly admitted to practice should be held out in a way which will give the impression that he is so admitted. No false or assumed or trade name should be used to disguise the practitioner or his partnership or professional corporation.
